<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The action of the poem begins on <span epub:type="z3998:event">Good Friday</span> of the year 1300, at which time Dante, who was born in 1265, had reached the middle of the Scriptural threescore years and ten. It ends on the first Sunday after <span epub:type="z3998:event">Easter</span>, making in all ten days. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The dark forest of human life, with its passions, vices, and perplexities of all kinds; politically the state of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Florence</span> with its factions Guelf and Ghibelline. <cite>Dante, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Convito</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 25</cite>, says: “Thus the adolescent, who enters into the erroneous forest of this life, would not know how to keep the right way if he were not guided by his elders.”</p>
					<p><cite>Brunetto Latini, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Tesoretto</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 75</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem" xml:lang="it">
						<p>
							<span>“Pensando a capo chino</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Perdei il gran cammino,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>E tenni alla traversa</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">D’ una selva diversa.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><cite>Spenser, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Faerie Queene</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 45</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Seeking adventures in the salvage wood.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Bunyan, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pilgrim’s Progress</i></cite>, which is a kind of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Divine Comedy</i> in prose, says: “I beheld then that they all went on till they came to the foot of the hill Difficulty. … But the narrow way lay right up the hill, and the name of the going up the side of the hill is called Difficulty. … They went then till they came to the Delectable Mountains, which mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which we have spoken before.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Bunyan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pilgrim’s Progress</i></cite>:⁠—“But now in this valley of Humiliation poor Christian was hard put to it; for he had gone but a little way before he spied a foul fiend coming over the field to meet him; his name is Apollyon. Then did Christian begin to be afraid, and to cast in his mind whether to go back or stand his ground. … Now at the end of this valley was another, called the valley of the Shadow of Death; and Christian must needs go through it, because the way to the Celestial City lay through the midst of it.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The sun, with all its symbolical meanings. This is the morning of <span epub:type="z3998:event">Good Friday</span>.</p>
					<p>In the Ptolemaic system the sun was one of the planets. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The deep mountain tarn of his heart, dark with its own depth, and the shadows hanging over it. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Jeremiah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6</cite>: “That led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt.”</p>
					<p>In his note upon this passage Mr. Wright quotes Spenser’s lines. <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Faerie Queene</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 31</cite>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">“there creature never passed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That back returned without heavenly grace.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Climbing the hillside slowly, so that he rests longest on the foot that is lowest. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Jeremiah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 6</cite>: “Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Worldly Pleasure; and politically <span epub:type="z3998:place">Florence</span>, with its factions of Bianchi and Neri. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="it">Più volte volto.</i> Dante delights in a play upon words as much as Shakespeare. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The stars of Aries. Some philosophers and fathers think the world was created in Spring. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ambition; and politically the royal house of <span epub:type="z3998:place">France</span>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Some editions read <i xml:lang="it">temesse</i>, others <i xml:lang="it">tremesse</i>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Avarice; and politically the Court of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Rome</span>, or temporal power of the Popes. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dante as a Ghibelline and Imperialist is in opposition to the Guelfs, Pope Boniface <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, and the King of <span epub:type="z3998:place">France</span>, Philip the Fair, and is banished from <span epub:type="z3998:place">Florence</span>, out of the sunshine, and into “the dry wind that blows from dolorous poverty.”</p>
					<p>Cato speaks of the “silent moon” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Re Rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>, <i xml:lang="it">Evehito luna silenti</i>; and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>, <i xml:lang="it">Vites inseri luna silenti</i>. Also <cite>Pliny, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. 39</cite>, has <i xml:lang="it">Silens luna</i>; and <cite>Milton, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Samson Agonistes</i></cite>, “Silent as the moon.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The long neglect of classic studies in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span> before Dante’s time. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Born under Julius Caesar, but too late to grow up to manhood during his Imperial reign. He flourished later under Augustus. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In this passage Dante but expresses the universal veneration felt for Virgil during the Middle Ages, and especially in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span>. Petrarch’s copy of Virgil is still preserved in the Ambrosian Library at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Milan</span>; and at the beginning of it he has recorded in a Latin note the time of his first meeting with Laura, and the date of her death, which, he says, “I write in this book, rather than elsewhere, because it comes often under my eye.”</p>
					<p>In the popular imagination Virgil became a mythical personage and a mighty magician. See the story of “Virgilius” in Thom’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Early Prose Romances</i>, 11. Dante selects him for his guide, as symbolizing human science or Philosophy. “I say and affirm,” he remarks, <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Convito</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 16</cite>, “that the lady with whom I became enamored after my first love was the most beautiful and modest daughter of the Emperor of the Universe, to whom Pythagoras gave the name of Philosophy.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dante seems to have been already conscious of the fame which his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Vita Nuova</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Canzoni</i> had given him. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The greyhound is Can Grande della Scala, Lord of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Verona</span>, Imperial Vicar, Ghibelline, and friend of Dante. Verona is between Feltro in the <span epub:type="z3998:place">Marca Trivigiana</span>, and Montefeltro in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Romagna</span>. <cite>Boccaccio, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decameron</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 7</cite>, speaks of him as “one of the most notable and magnificent lords that had been known in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span>, since the Emperor Frederick the Second.” To him Dante dedicated the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradiso</i>. Some commentators think the <i xml:lang="it">Veltro</i> is not Can Grande, but Ugguccione della Faggiola. See Troya, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Del Veltro Allegorico di Dante</i>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The plains of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span>, in contradistinction to the mountains; the <i xml:lang="la">humilemque Italiam</i> of <cite>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 522</cite>: “And now the stars being chased away, blushing Aurora appeared, when far off we espy the hills obscure, and lowly <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span>.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>I give preference to the reading, <i xml:lang="it">Di quegli antichi spiriti dolenti</i>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Beatrice. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Evening of <span epub:type="z3998:event">Good Friday</span></p>
					<p><cite>Dante, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Convito</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 2</cite>, says: “Man is called by philosophers the divine animal.” <cite>Chaucer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Assemble of Foules</i></cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“The daie gan failen, and the darke night</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That reveth bestes from hir businesse</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Berafte me my boke for lacke of light.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><cite>Mr. Ruskin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Painters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 240</cite>, speaking of Dante’s use of the word “<i xml:lang="it">bruno</i>,” says:⁠—</p>
					<p>“In describing a simple twilight⁠—not a Hades twilight, but an ordinarily fair evening⁠—(<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem"><abbr>Inf.</abbr></i><span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1</cite>), he says, the ‘brown’ air took the animals away from their fatigues;⁠—the waves under Charon’s boat are ‘brown’ (<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem"><abbr>Inf.</abbr></i><span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 117</cite>); and Lethe, which is perfectly clear and yet dark, as with oblivion, is ‘bruna-bruna,’ ‘brown, <em>exceeding</em> brown’ Now, clearly in all these cases no <em>warmth</em> is meant to be mingled in the color. Dante had never seen one of our bog-streams, with its porter-colored foam; and there can be no doubt that, in calling Lethe brown, he means that it was dark slate-gray, inclining to black; as, for instance, our clear <span epub:type="z3998:place">Cumberland</span> lakes, which, looked straight down upon where they are deep, seem to be lakes of ink. I am sure this is the color he means; because no clear stream or lake on the Continent ever looks brown, but blue or green; and Dante, by merely taking away the pleasant color, would get at once to this idea of grave clear gray. So, when he was talking of twilight, his eye for color was far too good to let him call it <em>brown</em> in our sense. Twilight is not brown, but purple, golden, or dark gray; and this last was what Dante meant. Farther, I find that this negation of color is always the means by which Dante subdues his tones. Thus the fatal inscription on the Hades gate is written in ‘obscure color,’ and the air which torments the passionate spirits is ‘aer nero,’ <em>black</em> air (<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem"><abbr>Inf.</abbr></i><span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 51</cite>), called presently afterwards (<cite>line 81</cite>) malignant air, just as the gray cliffs are called malignant cliffs.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Aeneas, founder of the Roman Empire. <cite>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, B. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></cite>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“That is,” says <cite>Boccaccio, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Comento</i></cite>, “St. Peter the Apostle, called the greater on account of his papal dignity, and to distinguish him from many other holy men of the same name.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>St. Paul. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acts</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 15</cite>: “He is a chosen vessel unto me.” Also, <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">2 Corinthians</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 3, 4</cite>: “And I knew such a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell; God knoweth; how that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Macbeth</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. 1</cite>:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The flighty purpose never is o’ertook,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unless the deed go with it.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Suspended in Limbo; neither in pain nor in glory. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brighter than the star; than “that star which is brightest,” comments Boccaccio. Others say the Sun, and refer to <cite>Dante’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Canzone</i></cite>, beginning:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“The star of beauty which doth measure time,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The lady seems, who has enamored me,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Placed in the heaven of Love.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Lear</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. 3</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i6">”Her voice was ever soft,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Gentle, and low; an excellent thing in woman.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This passage will recall Minerva transmitting the message of Juno to Achilles, <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></cite>: “Go thou forthwith to the army of the Achaeans, and hesitate not; but restrain each man with thy persuasive words, nor suffer them, to drag to the sea their double-oared ships.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Beatrice Portinari, Dante’s first love, the inspiration of his song and in his mind the symbol of the Divine. He says oi her in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Vita Nuova</i></cite>:⁠—“This most gentle lady, of whom there has been discourse in what precedes, reached such favor among the people, that when she passed along the way persons ran to see her, which gave me wonderful delight. And when she was near any one, such modesty took possession of his heart, that he did not dare to raise his eyes or to return her salutation; and to this, should any one doubt it, many, as having experienced it, could bear witness for me. She, crowned and clothed with humility, took her way, displaying no pride in that which she saw and heard. Many, when she had passed, said, ‘This is not a woman, rather is she one of the most beautiful angels of heaven.’ Others said, ‘She is a miracle. Blessed be the Lord who can perform such a marvel.’ I say, that she showed herself so gentle and so full of all beauties, that those who looked on her felt within themselves a pure and sweet delight, such as they could not tell in words.”⁠—<cite><abbr class="name">C. E.</abbr> Norton, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The New Life</i>, 51, 52</cite>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The heaven of the moon, which contains or encircles the earth. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The ampler circles of Paradise. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Divine Mercy. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>St. Lucia, emblem of enlightening Grace. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Rachel, emblem of Divine Contemplation. See <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem"><abbr>Par.</abbr></i><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span>. 9</cite>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><em>Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt;</em> “That is,” says <cite>Boccaccio, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Comento</i></cite>, “the sea cannot boast of being more impetuous or more dangerous than that.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This simile has been imitated by Chaucer, Spenser, and many more. <cite>Jeremy Taylor</cite> says:⁠—</p>
					<p>“So have I seen the sun kiss the frozen earth, which was bound up with the images of death, and the colder breath of the north; and then the waters break from their enclosures, and melt with joy, and run in useful channels; and the flies do rise again from their little graves in walls, and dance awhile in the air, to tell that there is joy within, and that the great mother of creatures will open the stock of her new refreshment, become useful to mankind, and sing praises to her Redeemer.”</p>
					<p><cite>Rossetti, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Spirito Antipapale del Secolo di Dante</i>, translated by Miss Ward, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. 216</cite>, makes this political application of the lines: “The <em>Florentines</em>, called <em>Sons of Flora</em>, are compared to <em>flowers</em>; and Dante calls the two parties who divided the city <em>white</em> and <em>black flowers</em>, and himself <em>white-flower</em>⁠—the name by which he was called by many. Now he makes use of a very abstruse comparison, to express how he became, from a Guelph or <em>Black</em>, a Ghibelline or <em>White</em>. He describes himself as a <em>flower</em>, first bent and closed by the night frosts, and then <em>blanched</em> or <em>whitened</em> by the sun (the symbol of reason), which opens its leaves; and what produces the effect of the sun on him is a speech of Virgil’s, persuading him to follow his guidance.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This canto begins with a repetition of sounds like the tolling of a funeral bell: <i xml:lang="it">dolente … dolore!</i></p>
					<p><cite>Ruskin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Painters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 215</cite>, speaking of the Inferno, says:⁠—</p>
					<p>“Milton’s effort, in all that he tells us of his Inferno, is to make it indefinite; Dante’s, to make it <em>definite</em>. Both, indeed, describe it as entered through gates; but, within the gate, all is wild and fenceless with Milton, having indeed its four rivers⁠—the last vestige of the medieval tradition⁠—but rivers which flow through a waste of mountain and moorland, and by ‘many a frozen, many a fiery Alp.’ But Dante’s Inferno is accurately separated into circles drawn with well-pointed compasses; mapped and properly surveyed in every direction, trenched in a thoroughly good style of engineering from depth to depth, and divided, in the ‘<em>accurate</em> middle’ (<i xml:lang="it">dritto mezzo</i>) of its deepest abyss, into a concentric series of ten moats and embankments, like those about a castle, with bridges from each embankment to the next; precisely in the manner of those bridges over Hiddekel and Euphrates, which Mr. Macaulay thinks so innocently designed, apparently not aware that he is also laughing at Dante. These larger fosses are of rock, and the bridges also; but as he goes further into detail, Dante tells us of various minor fosses and embankments, in which he anxiously points out to us not only the formality, but the neatness and perfectness, of the stonework. For instance, in describing the river Phlegethon, he tells us that it was ‘paved with stone at the bottom, and at the sides, and <em>over the edges of the sides</em>,’ just as the water is at the baths of Bulicame; and for fear we should think this embankment at all <em>larger</em> than it really was, Dante adds, carefully, that it was made just like the embankments of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Ghent</span> or <span epub:type="z3998:place">Bruges</span> against the sea, or those in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Lombardy</span> which bank the Brenta, only ‘not so high, nor so wide,’ as any of these. And besides the trenches, we have two well-built castles; one like <span epub:type="z3998:place">Ecbatana</span>, with seven circuits of wall (and surrounded by a fair stream), wherein the great poets and sages of antiquity live; and another, a great fortified city with walls of iron, red-hot, and a deep fosse round it, and full of ‘grave citizens,’⁠—the city of Dis.</p>
					<p>“Now, whether this be in what we moderns call ‘good taste,’ or not, I do not mean just now to inquire⁠—Dante having nothing to do with taste, but with the facts of what he had seen; only, so far as the imaginative faculty of the two poets is concerned, note that Milton’s vagueness is not the sign of imagination, but of its absence, so far as it is significative in the matter. For it does not follow, because Milton did not map out his Inferno as Dante did, that he <em>could</em> not have done. so if he had chosen; only it was the easier and less imaginative process to leave it vague than to define it. Imagination is always the seeing and asserting faculty; that which obscures or conceals may be judgment, or feeling, but not invention. The invention, whether good or bad, is in the accurate engineering, not in the fog and uncertainty.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Aristotle</cite> says: “The good of the intellect is the highest beatitude”; and <cite>Dante in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Convito</i></cite>: “The True is the good of the intellect.” In other words, the knowledge of God is intellectual good.</p>
					<p>“It is a most just punishment,” says <cite>St. Augustine</cite>, “that man should lose that freedom which man could not use, yet had power to keep, if he would, and that he who had knowledge to do what was right, and did not do it, should be deprived of the knowledge of what was right; and that he who would not do righteously, when he had the power, should lose the power to do it when he had the will.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The description given of the Mouth of Hell by <cite>Frate Alberico, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Visio</i>, 9</cite>, is in the grotesque spirit of the Medieval Mysteries.</p>
					<p>“After all these things, I was led to the Tartarean Regions, and to the mouth of the Infernal Pit, which seemed like unto a well; regions full of horrid darkness, of fetid exhalations, of shrieks and loud howlings. Near this Hell there was a Worm of immeasurable size, bound with a huge chain, one end of which seemed to be fastened in Hell. Before the mouth of this Hell there stood a great multitude of souls, which he absorbed at once, as if they were flies; so that, drawing in his breath, he swallowed them all together; then, breathing, exhaled them all on fire, like sparks.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The reader will here be reminded of Bunyan’s town of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Fair-speech.</span></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:drama">
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">
										<p>Christian</p>
									</td>
									<td>
										<p>Pray who are your kindred there, if a man may be so bold.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">
										<p>By-ends</p>
									</td>
									<td>
										<p>Almost the whole town; and in particular my Lord Turnabout, my Lord Timeserver, my Lord Fair-speech, from whose ancestors that town first took its name; also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr, Facing-both-ways, Mr. Anything⁠—and the parson of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was my mother’s own brother by father’s side. …</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</blockquote>
					<p>“There Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow Hopeful, saying, ‘It runs in my mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech; and if it be he, we have as very a knave in our company as dwelleth in all these parts.’ ” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Many commentators and translators interpret <i xml:lang="it">alcuna</i> in its usual signification of <em>some</em>: “For some glory the damned would have from them.” This would be a reason why these pusillanimous ghosts should not be sent into the profounder abyss, but no reason why they should not be received there. This is strengthened by what comes afterwards, <cite><abbr>l.</abbr> 63</cite>. These souls were “hateful to God, and to his enemies.” They were not good enough for Heaven, nor bad enough for Hell. “So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth.” <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revelation</i><span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 16</cite>.</p>
					<p><cite>Macchiavelli</cite> represents this scorn of inefficient mediocrity in an epigram on Peter Soderini:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The night that Peter Soderini died</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He at the mouth of Hell himself presented.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>‘What, you come into Hell? poor ghost demented,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Go to the Babies’ Limbo!’ Pluto cried.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The same idea is intensified in the old ballad of <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Carle of Kelly-Burn Brees</i>, Cromek, <abbr>p.</abbr> 37</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“She’s nae fit for heaven, an’ she’ll ruin a’ hell.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This restless flag is an emblem of the shifting and unstable minds of its followers. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Generally supposed to be Pope Celestine <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> whose great refusal, or abdication, of the papal office is thus described by <cite>Boccaccio in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Comento</i></cite>:⁠—</p>
					<p>“Being a simple man and of a holy life, living as a hermit in the mountains of Morrone in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Abruzzo</span>, above <span epub:type="z3998:place">Selmona</span>, he was elected Pope in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Perugia</span> after the death of Pope Niccola d’ Ascoli; and his name being Peter, he was called Celestine. Considering his simplicity, Cardinal Messer Benedetto Gatano, a very cunning man, of great courage and desirous of being Pope, managing astutely, began to show him that he held this high office much to the prejudice of his own soul, inasmuch as he did not feel himself competent for it;⁠—others pretend that he contrived with some private servants of his to have voices heard in the chamber of the aforesaid Pope, which, as if they were voices of angels sent from heaven, said, ‘Resign, Celestine! Resign, Celestine!’⁠—moved by which, and being an idiotic man, he took counsel with Messer Benedetto aforesaid, as to the best method of resigning.”</p>
					<p>Celestine having relinquished the papal office, this “Messer Benedetto aforesaid” was elected Pope, under the title of Boniface <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. His greatest misfortune was that he had Dante for an adversary.</p>
					<p>Gower gives this legend of Pope Celestine in his <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Confessio Amantis</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></cite>, as an example of “the vice of supplantacion.” He says:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“This clerk, when he hath herd the form,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How he the pope shuld enform,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Toke of the cardinal his leve</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And goth him home, till it was eve.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And prively the trompe he hadde</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Til that the pope was abedde.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And at midnight when he knewe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The pope slepte, than he blewe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Within his trompe through the wall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And tolde in what maner he shall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His papacie leve, and take</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His first estate.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><cite>Milman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> Latin Christianity</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. 194</cite>, speaks thus upon the subject:⁠—</p>
					<p>“The abdication of Celestine <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> was an event unprecedented in the annals of the Church, and jarred harshly against some of the first principles of the Papal authority. It was a confession of common humanity, of weakness below the ordinary standard of men in him whom the Conclave, with more than usual certitude, as guided by the special interposition of the Holy Ghost, had raised to the spiritual throne of the world. The Conclave had been, as it seemed, either under an illusion as to this declared manifestation of the Holy Spirit, or had been permitted to deceive itself. Nor was there less incongruity in a Pope, whose office invested him in something at least approaching to infallibility, acknowledging before the world his utter incapacity, his undeniable fallibility. That idea, formed out of many conflicting conceptions, yet forcibly harmonized by long, traditionary reverence, of unerring wisdom, oracular truth, authority which it was sinful to question or limit, was strangely disturbed and confused, not as before by too overweening ambition, or even awful yet still unacknowledged crime, but by avowed weakness, bordering on imbecility. His profound piety hardly reconciled the confusion. A saint after all made but a bad Pope.</p>
					<p>“It was viewed, in his own time, in a different light by different minds. The monkish writers held it up as the most noble example of monastic, of Christian perfection. Admirable as was his election, his abdication was even more to be admired. It was an example of humility stupendous to all, imitable by few. The divine approval was said to be shown by a miracle which followed directly on his resignation; but the scorn of man has been expressed by the undying verse of Dante, who condemned him who was guilty of the baseness of the ‘great refusal’ to that circle of hell where are those disdained alike by mercy and justice, on whom the poet will not condescend to look. This sentence, so accordant with the stirring and passionate soul of the great Florentine, has been feebly counteracted, if counteracted, by the praise of Petrarch in his declamation on the beauty of a solitary life, for which the lyrist professed a somewhat hollow and poetic admiration. Assuredly there was no magnanimity contemptuous of the Papal greatness in the abdication of Celestine; it was the weariness, the conscious inefficiency, the regret of a man suddenly wrenched away from all his habits, pursuits, and avocations, and unnaturally compelled or tempted to assume an uncongenial dignity. It was the cry of passionate feebleness to be released from an insupportable burden. Compassion is the highest emotion of sympathy which it would have desired or could deserve.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Spenser’s “misty dampe of misconceyving night.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, Davidson’s translation</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<p>“A grim ferryman guards these floods and rivers, Charon, of frightful slovenliness; on whose chin a load of gray hair neglected lies; his eyes are flame: his vestments hang from his shoulders by a knot, with filth overgrown. Himself thrusts on the barge with a pole, and tends the sails, and wafts over the bodies in his iron-colored boat, now in years: but the god is of fresh and green old age. Hither the whole tribe in swarms come pouring to the banks, matrons and men, the souls of magnanimous heroes who had gone through life, boys and unmarried maids, and young men who had been stretched on the funeral pile before the eyes of their parents; as numerous as withered leaves fall in the woods with the first cold of autumn, or as numerous as birds flock to the land from deep ocean, when the chilling year drives them beyond sea, and sends them to sunny climes. They stood praying to cross the flood the first, and were stretching forth their hands with fond desire to gain the further bank: but the sullen boatman admits sometimes these, sometimes those; while others to a great distance removed, he debars from the banks.”</p>
					<p>And <cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. 4</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“I passed, methought, the melancholy flood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With that grim ferryman which poets write of,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Measure for Measure</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 1</cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“This sensible warm motion to become</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In thrilling regions of thick-ribbed ice;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And blown with restless violence round about</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The pendent world; or to be worse than worst</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of those that lawless and incertain thoughts</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Imagine howling.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></cite>: “This is the region of Ghosts, of Sleep and drowsy Night; to waft over the bodies of the living in my Stygian boat is not permitted.” <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The souls that were to be saved assembled at the mouth of the Tiber, where they were received by the celestial pilot, or ferryman, who transported them to the shores of Purgatory, as described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem"><abbr>Purg.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Many critics, and foremost among them Padre Pompeo Venturi, blame Dante for mingling together things Pagan and Christian. But they should remember how through all the Middle Ages human thought was wrestling with the old traditions; how many Pagan observances passed into Christianity in those early days; what reverence Dante had for Virgil and the classics; and how many Christian nations still preserve some traces of Paganism in the names of the stars, the months, and the days. Padre Pompeo should not have forgotten that he, though a Christian, bore a Pagan name, which perhaps is as evident a <i xml:lang="it">brutto miscuglio</i> in a learned Jesuit, as any which he has pointed out in Dante.</p>
					<p>Upon him and other commentators of the Divine Poem, a very amusing chapter might be written. While the great Comedy is going on upon the scene above, with all its pomp and music, these critics in the pit keep up such a perpetual wrangling among themselves, as seriously to disturb the performance. Biagioli is the most violent of all, particularly against Venturi, whom he calls an “infamous dirty dog,” <i xml:lang="it">sozzo can vituperato</i>, an epithet hardly permissible in the most heated literary controversy. Whereupon in return Zani de’ Ferranti calls Biagioli “an inurbane grammarian,” and a “most ungrateful ingrate,”⁠—<i xml:lang="it">quel grammatico inurbano … ingrato ingratissimo</i>.</p>
					<p>Any one who is desirous of tracing out the presence of Paganism in Christianity will find the subject amply discussed by Middleton in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letter from Rome</i>. <a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Dryden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, B. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></cite>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“His eyes like hollow furnaces on fire.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Homer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></cite>: “As is the race of leaves, such is that of men; some leaves the wind scatters upon the ground, and others the budding wood produces, for they come again in the season of Spring. So is the race of men, one springs up and the other dies.”</p>
					<p>See also Note 50 of this canto.</p>
					<p><cite><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ruskin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Painters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. 160</cite>, says:⁠—</p>
					<p>“When Dante describes the spirits falling from the bank of Acheron ‘as dead leaves flutter from a bough,’ he gives the most perfect image possible of their utter lightness, feebleness, passiveness, and scattering agony of despair, without, however, for an instant losing his own clear perception that <em>these</em> are souls, and <em>those</em> are leaves: he makes no confusion of one with the other.”</p>
					<p><cite>Shelley in his “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode to the West Wind</span>”</cite> inverts this image, and compares the dead leaves to ghosts:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“O wild West Wind! thou breath of Autumn’s being!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou from whose presence the leaves dead</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are driven like ghosts, from an enchanter fleeing,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pestilence-stricken multitudes.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/inferno.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
