<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Inferno</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="inferno" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="inferno-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Oft have I seen at some cathedral door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off the noises of the world retreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loud vociferations of the street</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Become an undistinguishable roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, as I enter here from day to day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And leave my burden at this minster gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tumult of the time disconsolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To inarticulate murmurs dies away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the eternal ages watch and wait.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What exultations trampling on despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose this poem of the earth and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This mediæval miracle of song!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<h2 epub:type="title">Inferno</h2>
			<section id="inferno-canto-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Dark Forest.⁠—The Hill of Difficulty.⁠—The Panther, the Lion, and the Wolf.⁠—Virgil</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Midway upon the journey of our life<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I found myself within a forest dark,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the straightforward pathway had been lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah me! how hard a thing it is to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What was this forest savage, rough, and stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which in the very thought renews the fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So bitter is it, death is little more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the good to treat, which there I found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak will I of the other things I saw there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot well repeat how there I entered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So full was I of slumber at the moment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In which I had abandoned the true way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But after I had reached a mountain’s foot,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At that point where the valley terminated,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which had with consternation pierced my heart,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upward I looked, and I beheld its shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vested already with that planet’s rays<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which leadeth others right by every road.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then was the fear a little quieted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in my heart’s lake had endured throughout<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night, which I had passed so piteously.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And even as he, who, with distressful breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth issued from the sea upon the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns to the water perilous and gazes;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So did my soul, that still was fleeing onward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn itself back to re-behold the pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which never yet a living person left.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After my weary body I had rested,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The way resumed I on the desert slope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the firm foot ever was the lower.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And lo! almost where the ascent began,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A panther light and swift exceedingly,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with a spotted skin was covered o’er!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And never moved she from before my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, rather did impede so much my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many times I to return had turned.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The time was the beginning of the morning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And up the sun was mounting with those stars<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That with him were, what time the Love Divine</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At first in motion set those beauteous things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So were to me occasion of good hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The variegated skin of that wild beast,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hour of time, and the delicious season;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so much, that did not give me fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lion’s aspect which appeared to me.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He seemed as if against me he were coming</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With head uplifted, and with ravenous hunger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seemed the air was afraid of him;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And a she-wolf, that with all hungerings<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed to be laden in her meagreness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many folk has caused to live forlorn!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She brought upon me so much heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the affright that from her aspect came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I the hope relinquished of the height.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as he is who willingly acquires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the time comes that causes him to lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who weeps in all his thoughts and is despondent,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>E’en such made me that beast withouten peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, coming on against me by degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrust me back thither where the sun is silent.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While I was rushing downward to the lowland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before mine eyes did one present himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who seemed from long-continued silence hoarse.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I beheld him in the desert vast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Have pity on me,” unto him I cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whiche’er thou art, or shade or real man!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He answered me: “Not man; man once I was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both my parents were of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Lombardy</span>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mantuans by country both of them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">Sub Julio</i> was I born, though it was late,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lived at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Rome</span> under the good Augustus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">During the time of false and lying gods.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A Poet was I, and I sang that just</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Son of Anchises, who came forth from <span epub:type="z3998:place">Troy</span>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After that Ilion the superb was burned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But thou, why goest thou back to such annoyance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why climb’st thou not the Mount Delectable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the source and cause of every joy?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, art thou that Virgilius and that fountain<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which spreads abroad so wide a river of speech?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I made response to him with bashful forehead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O, of the other poets honor and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avail me the long study and great love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That have impelled me to explore thy volume!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art my master, and my author thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art alone the one from whom I took</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beautiful style that has done honor to me.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behold the beast, for which I have turned back;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Do thou protect me from her, famous Sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she doth make my veins and pulses tremble.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thee it behoves to take another road,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Responded he, when he beheld me weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If from this savage place thou wouldst escape;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Because this beast, at which thou criest out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suffers not any one to pass her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But so doth harass him, that she destroys him;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And has a nature so malign and ruthless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That never doth she glut her greedy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And after food is hungrier than before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Many the animals with whom she weds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more they shall be still, until the Greyhound<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comes, who shall make her perish in her pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He shall not feed on either earth or pelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But upon wisdom, and on love and virtue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Feltro and Feltro shall his nation be;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of that low <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span> shall he be the saviour,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On whose account the maid Camilla died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Euryalus, Turnus, Nisus, of their wounds;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through every city shall he hunt her down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until he shall have driven her back to Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There from whence envy first did let her loose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I think and judge it for thy best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou follow me, and I will be thy guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lead thee hence through the eternal place,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where thou shalt hear the desperate lamentations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shalt see the ancient spirits disconsolate,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who cry out each one for the second death;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou shalt see those who contented are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the fire, because they hope to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er it may be, to the blessed people;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom, then, if thou wishest to ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A soul shall be for that than I more worthy;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her at my departure I will leave thee;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Because that Emperor, who reigns above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that I was rebellious to his law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wills that through me none come into his city.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He governs everywhere, and there he reigns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is his city and his lofty throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O happy he whom thereto he elects!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I to him: “Poet, I thee entreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By that same God whom thou didst never know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I may escape this woe and worse,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou wouldst conduct me there where thou hast said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I may see the portal of Saint Peter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those thou makest so disconsolate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then he moved on, and I behind him followed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Dante’s Protest and Virgil’s Appeal.⁠—The Intercession of the Three Ladies Benedight</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Day was departing, and the embrowned air<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Released the animals that are on earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their fatigues; and I the only one</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Made myself ready to sustain the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of the way and likewise of the woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which memory that errs not shall retrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Muses, O high genius, now assist me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O memory, that didst write down what I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here thy nobility shall be manifest!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I began: “Poet, who guidest me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regard my manhood, if it be sufficient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou sayest, that of Silvius the parent,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While yet corruptible, unto the world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Immortal went, and was there bodily.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But if the adversary of all evil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was courteous, thinking of the high effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That issue would from him, and who, and what,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To men of intellect unmeet it seems not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was of great Rome, and of her empire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the empyreal heaven as father chosen;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The which and what, wishing to speak the truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were stablished as the holy place, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sits the successor of the greatest Peter.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon this journey, whence thou givest him vaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things did he hear, which the occasion were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both of his victory and the papal mantle.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thither went afterwards the Chosen Vessel,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring back comfort thence unto that Faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of salvation’s way is the beginning.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I, why thither come, or who concedes it?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I not Æneas am, I am not Paul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor I, nor others, think me worthy of it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore, if I resign myself to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I fear the coming may be ill-advised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou’rt wise, and knowest better than I speak.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as he is, who unwills what he willed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by new thoughts doth his intention change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that from his design he quite withdraws,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such I became, upon that dark hillside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because, in thinking, I consumed the emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was so very prompt in the beginning.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“If I have well thy language understood,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied that shade of the Magnanimous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thy soul attainted is with cowardice,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Which many times a man encumbers so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It turns him back from honored enterprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As false sight doth a beast, when he is shy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That thou mayst free thee from this apprehension,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll tell thee why I came, and what I heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first moment when I grieved for thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Among those was I who are in suspense,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And a fair, saintly Lady called to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such wise, I besought her to command me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her eyes where shining brighter than the Star;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she began to say, gentle and low,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With voice angelical, in her own language:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘O spirit courteous of Mantua,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom the fame still in the world endures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shall endure, long-lasting as the world;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A friend of mine, and not the friend of fortune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the desert slope is so impeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his way, that he has turned through terror,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And may, I fear, already be so lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I too late have risen to his succor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that which I have heard of him in Heaven.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bestir thee now, and with thy speech ornate,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with what needful is for his release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assist him so, that I may be consoled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beatrice am I, who do bid thee go;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I come from there, where I would fain return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love moved me, which compelleth me to speak.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I shall be in presence of my Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full often will I praise thee unto him.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then paused she, and thereafter I began:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘O Lady of virtue, thou alone through whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human race exceedeth all contained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the heaven that has the lesser circles,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So grateful unto me is thy commandment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To obey, if ’twere already done, were late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No farther need’st thou ope to me thy wish.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But the cause tell me why thou dost not shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The here descending down into this centre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the vast place thou burnest to return to.’<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>‘Since thou wouldst fain so inwardly discern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Briefly will I relate,’ she answered me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘Why I am not afraid to enter here.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of those things only should one be afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which have the power of doing others harm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the rest, no; because they are not fearful.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>God in his mercy such created me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That misery of yours attains me not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor any flame assails me of this burning.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A gentle Lady is in Heaven, who grieves<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At this impediment, to which I send thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that stern judgment there above is broken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In her entreaty she besought Lucia,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “Thy faithful one now stands in need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thee, and unto thee I recommend him.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lucia, foe of all that cruel is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hastened away, and came unto the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Beatrice” said she, “the true praise of God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why succorest thou not him, who loved thee so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee he issued from the vulgar herd?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dost thou not hear the pity of his plaint?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dost thou not see the death that combats him</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beside that flood, where ocean has no vaunt?”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Never were persons in the world so swift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To work their weal and to escape their woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I, after such words as these were uttered,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Came hither downward from my blessed seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confiding in thy dignified discourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which honors thee, and those who’ve listened to it.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After she thus had spoken unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weeping, her shining eyes she turned away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereby she made me swifter in my coming;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And unto thee I came, as she desired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have delivered thee from that wild beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which barred the beautiful mountain’s short ascent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What is it, then? Why, why dost thou delay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why is such baseness bedded in thy heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Daring and hardihood why hast thou not,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seeing that three such Ladies benedight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are caring for thee in the court of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so much good my speech doth promise thee?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as the flowerets, by nocturnal chill,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bowed down and closed, when the sun whitens them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uplift themselves all open on their stems;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such I became with my exhausted strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such good courage to my heart there coursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I began, like an intrepid person:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O she compassionate, who succored me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And courteous thou, who hast obeyed so soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The words of truth which she addressed to thee!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast my heart so with desire disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the adventure, with these words of thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That to my first intent I have returned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now go, for one sole will is in us both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou Leader, and thou Lord, and Master thou.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus said I to him; and when he had moved,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I entered on the deep and savage way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Gate of Hell.⁠—The Inefficient or Indifferent.⁠—Pope Celestine <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.⁠—The Shores of Acheron.⁠—Charon.⁠—The Earthquake and the Swoon</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Through me the way is to the city dolent;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through me the way is to eternal dole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through me the way among the people lost.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Justice incited my sublime Creator;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Created me divine Omnipotence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The highest Wisdom and the primal Love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before me there were no created things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only eterne, and I eternal last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hope abandon, ye who enter in!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These words in sombre color I beheld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Written upon the summit of a gate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I: “Their sense is, Master, hard to me!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me, as one experienced:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Here all suspicion needs must be abandoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All cowardice must needs be here extinct.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We to the place have come, where I have told thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold the people dolorous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have foregone the good of intellect.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after he had laid his hand on mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joyful mien, whence I was comforted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He led me in among the secret things.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There sighs, complaints, and ululations loud<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Resounded through the air without a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence I, at the beginning, wept thereat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Languages diverse, horrible dialects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accents of anger, words of agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And voices high and hoarse, with sound of hands,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Made up a tumult that goes whirling on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forever in that air forever black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as the sand doth, when the whirlwind breathes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I, who had my head with horror bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “Master, what is this which now I hear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What folk is this, which seems by pain so vanquished?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “This miserable mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maintain the melancholy souls of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who lived withouten infamy or praise.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Commingled are they with that caitiff choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Angels, who have not rebellious been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor faithful were to God, but were for self.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The heavens expelled them, not to be less fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor them the nethermore abyss receives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For glory none the damned would have from them.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I: “O Master, what so grievous is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To these, that maketh them lament so sore?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He answered: “I will tell thee very briefly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These have no longer any hope of death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this blind life of theirs is so debased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They envious are of every other fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No fame of them the world permits to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Misericord and Justice both disdain them.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us not speak of them, but look, and pass.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I, who looked again, beheld a banner,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, whirling round, ran on so rapidly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of all pause it seemed to me indignant;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And after it there came so long a train</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of people, that I ne’er would have believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever Death so many had undone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When some among them I had recognised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I looked, and I beheld the shade of him<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who made through cowardice the great refusal.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith I comprehended, and was certain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That this the sect was of the caitiff wretches</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hateful to God and to his enemies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These miscreants, who never were alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were naked, and were stung exceedingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By gadflies and by hornets that were there.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These did their faces irrigate with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, with their tears commingled, at their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the disgusting worms was gathered up.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when to gazing farther I betook me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People I saw on a great river’s bank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence said I: “Master, now vouchsafe to me,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That I may know who these are, and what law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes them appear so ready to pass over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I discern athwart the dusky light.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “These things shall all be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee, as soon as we our footsteps stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the dismal shore of Acheron.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then with mine eyes ashamed and downward cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fearing my words might irksome be to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From speech refrained I till we reached the river.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And lo! towards us coming in a boat<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An old man, hoary with the hair of eld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying: “Woe unto you, ye souls depraved!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hope nevermore to look upon the heavens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I come to lead you to the other shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the eternal shades in heat and frost.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, that yonder standest, living soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withdraw thee from these people, who are dead!”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when he saw that I did not withdraw,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He said: “By other ways, by other ports</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou to the shore shalt come, not here, for passage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lighter vessel needs must carry thee.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And unto him the Guide: “Vex thee not, Charon;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is so willed there where is power to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which is willed; and farther question not.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereat were quieted the fleecy cheeks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of him the ferryman of the livid fen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who round about his eyes had wheels of flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But all those souls who weary were and naked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their color changed and gnashed their teeth together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As soon as they had heard those cruel words.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>God they blasphemed and their progenitors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The human race, the place, the time, the seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their engendering and of their birth!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereafter all together they drew back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which waiteth every man who fears not God.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Charon the demon, with the eyes of glede,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beckoning to them, collects them all together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beats with his oar whoever lags behind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As in the autumn-time the leaves fall off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">First one and then another, till the branch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the earth surrenders all its spoils;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In similar wise the evil seed of Adam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throw themselves from that margin one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At signals, as a bird unto its lure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So they depart across the dusky wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ere upon the other side they land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again on this side a new troop assembles.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My son,” the courteous Master said to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All those who perish in the wrath of God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here meet together out of every land;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ready are they to pass o’er the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because celestial Justice spurs them on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that their fear is turned into desire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This way there never passes a good soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence if Charon doth complain of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well mayst thou know now what his speech imports.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This being finished, all the dusk champaign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trembled so violently, that of that terror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The recollection bathes me still with sweat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The land of tears gave forth a blast of wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fulminated a vermilion light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which overmastered in me every sense,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as a man whom sleep hath seized I fell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The First Circle.⁠—Limbo, or the Border Land of the Unbaptized.⁠—The Four Poets, Homer, Horace, Ovid, and Lucan.⁠—The Noble Castle of Philosophy</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Broke the deep lethargy within my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A heavy thunder, so that I upstarted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to a person who by force is wakened;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And round about I moved my rested eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprisen erect, and steadfastly I gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To recognise the place wherein I was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>True is it, that upon the verge I found me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the abysmal valley dolorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gathers thunder of infinite ululations.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Obscure, profound it was, and nebulous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that by fixing on its depths my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing whatever I discerned therein.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Let us descend now into the blind world,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began the Poet, pallid utterly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I will be first, and thou shalt second be.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I, who of his color was aware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said: “How shall I come, if thou art afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who ’rt wont to be a comfort to my fears?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “The anguish of the people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are below here in my face depicts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That pity which for terror thou hast taken.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let us go on, for the long way impels us.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he went in, and thus he made me enter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The foremost circle that surrounds the abyss.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, in so far as I had power to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were lamentations none, but only sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That tremble made the everlasting air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And this arose from sorrow without torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the crowds had, that many were and great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of infants and of women and of men.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To me the Master good: “Thou dost not ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What spirits these, which thou beholdest, are?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now will I have thee know, ere thou go farther,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That they sinned not; and if they merit had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is not enough, because they had not baptism</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is the portal of the Faith thou holdest;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if they were before Christianity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the right manner they adored not God;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And among such as these am I myself.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For such defects, and not for other guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lost are we, and are only so far punished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That without hope we live on in desire.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great grief seized on my heart when this I heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because some people of much worthiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I knew, who in that Limbo were suspended.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Tell me, my Master, tell me, thou my Lord,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began I, with desire of being certain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that Faith which o’ercometh every error,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Came any one by his own merit hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or by another’s, who was blessed thereafter?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he, who understood my covert speech,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Replied: “I was a novice in this state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I saw hither come a Mighty One,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With sign of victory incoronate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hence he drew forth the shade of the First Parent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that of his son Abel, and of Noah,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Moses the lawgiver, and the obedient</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Abraham, patriarch, and David, king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Israel with his father and his children,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Rachel, for whose sake he did so much,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And others many, and he made them blessed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thou must know, that earlier than these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Never were any human spirits saved.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We ceased not to advance because he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still were passing onward through the forest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The forest, say I, of thick-crowded ghosts.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not very far as yet our way had gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This side the summit, when I saw a fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That overcame a hemisphere of darkness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We were a little distant from it still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not so far that I in part discerned not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That honorable people held that place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou who honorest every art and science,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who may these be, which such great honor have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That from the fashion of the rest it parts them?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “The honorable name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sounds of them above there in thy life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wins grace in Heaven, that so advances them.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the mean time a voice was heard by me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“All honor be to the pre-eminent Poet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His shade returns again, that was departed.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After the voice had ceased and quiet was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Four mighty shades I saw approaching us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Semblance had they nor sorrowful nor glad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To say to me began my gracious Master:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Him with that falchion in his hand behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who comes before the three, even as their lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That one is Homer, Poet sovereign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who comes next is Horace, the satirist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third is Ovid, and the last is Lucan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Because to each of these with me applies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The name that solitary voice proclaimed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They do me honor, and in that do well.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus I beheld assemble the fair school</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that lord of the song pre-eminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who o’er the others like an eagle soars.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they together had discoursed somewhat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They turned to me with signs of salutation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on beholding this, my Master smiled;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And more of honor still, much more, they did me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that they made me one of their own band;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the sixth was I, ’mid so much wit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus we went on as far as to the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Things saying ’t is becoming to keep silent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was the saying of them where I was.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We came unto a noble castle’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seven times encompassed with lofty walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defended round by a fair rivulet;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This we passed over even as firm ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through portals seven I entered with these Sages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came into a meadow of fresh verdure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>People were there with solemn eyes and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of great authority in their countenance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They spake but seldom, and with gentle voices.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus we withdrew ourselves upon one side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into an opening luminous and lofty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that they all of them were visible.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There opposite, upon the green enamel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were pointed out to me the mighty spirits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom to have seen I feel myself exalted.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I saw Electra with companions many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Mongst whom I knew both Hector and Æneas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cæsar in armor with gerfalcon eyes;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I saw Camilla and Penthesilea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the other side, and saw the King Latinus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with Lavinia his daughter sat;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I saw that Brutus who drove Tarquin forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lucretia, Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw alone, apart, the Saladin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I had lifted up my brows a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Master I beheld of those who know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sit with his philosophic family.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All gaze upon him, and all do him honor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There I beheld both Socrates and Plato,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who nearer him before the others stand;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Democritus, who puts the world on chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Zeno, Empedocles, and Heraclitus;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of qualities I saw the good collector,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hight Dioscorides; and Orpheus saw I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tully and Livy, and moral Seneca,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Euclid, geometrician, and Ptolemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicenna,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Averroes, who the great Comment made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I cannot all of them portray in full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because so drives me onward the long theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many times the word comes short of fact.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sixfold company in two divides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another way my sapient Guide conducts me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth from the quiet to the air that trembles;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to a place I come where nothing shines.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Second Circle.⁠—Minos.⁠—The Wanton.⁠—The Infernal Hurricane.⁠—Francesca da Rimini</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thus I descended out of the first circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the second, that less space begirds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so much greater dole, that goads to wailing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There standeth Minos horribly, and snarls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Examines the transgressions at the entrance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Judges, and sends according as he girds him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I say, that when the spirit evil-born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cometh before him, wholly it confesses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this discriminator of transgressions</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Seeth what place in Hell is meet for it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Girds himself with his tail as many times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As grades he wishes it should be thrust down.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Always before him many of them stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They go by turns each one unto the judgment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They speak, and hear, and then are downward hurled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou, that to this dolorous hostelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comest,” said Minos to me, when he saw me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving the practice of so great an office,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Look how thou enterest, and in whom thou trustest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let not the portal’s amplitude deceive thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And unto him my Guide: “Why criest thou too?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Do not impede his journey fate-ordained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is so willed there where is power to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which is willed; and ask no further question.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now begin the dolesome notes to grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Audible unto me; now am I come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where much lamentation strikes upon me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I came into a place mute of all light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which bellows as the sea does in a tempest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If by opposing winds ’t is combated.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The infernal hurricane that never rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurtles the spirits onward in its rapine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whirling them round, and smiting, it molests them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they arrive before the precipice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There are the shrieks, the plaints, and the laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There they blaspheme the puissance divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I understood that unto such a torment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The carnal malefactors were condemned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who reason subjugate to appetite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as the wings of starlings bear them on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the cold season in large band and full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So doth that blast the spirits maledict;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It hither, thither, downward, upward, drives them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hope doth comfort them forevermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not of repose, but even of lesser pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And as the cranes go chanting forth their lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making in air a long line of themselves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So saw I coming, uttering lamentations,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Shadows borne onward by the aforesaid stress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereupon said I: “Master, who are those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">People, whom the black air so castigates?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The first of those, of whom intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou fain wouldst have,” then said he unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The empress was of many languages.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To sensual vices she was so abandoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lustful she made licit in her law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To remove the blame to which she had been led.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She is Semiramis, of whom we read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she succeeded Ninus, and was his spouse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She held the land which now the Sultan rules.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The next is she who killed herself for love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And broke faith with the ashes of Sichæus;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then Cleopatra the voluptuous.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Helen I saw, for whom so many ruthless</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seasons revolved; and saw the great Achilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who at the last hour combated with Love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Paris I saw, Tristan; and more than a thousand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shades did he name and point out with his finger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom Love had separated from our life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>After that I had listened to my Teacher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Naming the dames of eld and cavaliers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pity prevailed, and I was nigh bewildered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I began: “O Poet, willingly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak would I to those two, who go together,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seem upon the wind to be so light.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, he to me: “Thou ’lt mark, when they shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nearer to us; and then do thou implore them</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By love which leadeth them, and they will come.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as the wind in our direction sways them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My voice uplift I: “O ye weary souls!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come speak to us, if no one interdicts it.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As turtle-doves, called onward by desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With open and steady wings to the sweet nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fly through the air by their volition borne,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So came they from the band where Dido is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Approaching us athwart the air malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So strong was the affectionate appeal.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O living creature gracious and benignant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who visiting goest through the purple air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Us, who have stained the world incarnadine,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If were the King of the Universe our friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We would pray unto him to give thee peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since thou hast pity on our woe perverse.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of what it pleases thee to hear and speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That will we hear, and we will speak to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While silent is the wind, as it is now.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sitteth the city, wherein I was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sea-shore where the Po descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rest in peace with all his retinue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love, that on gentle heart doth swiftly seize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seized this man for the person beautiful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That was ta’en from me, and still the mode offends me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love, that exempts no one beloved from loving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seized me with pleasure of this man so strongly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, as thou seest, it doth not yet desert me;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Love has conducted us unto one death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Caina waiteth him who quenched our life!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These words were borne along from them to us.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As soon as I had heard those souls tormented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I bowed my face, and so long held it down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the Poet said to me: “What thinkest?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When I made answer, I began: “Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How many pleasant thoughts, how much desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Conducted these unto the dolorous pass!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then unto them I turned me, and I spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I began: “Thine agonies, Francesca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad and compassionate to weeping make me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But tell me, at the time of those sweet sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By what and in what manner Love conceded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That you should know your dubious desires?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she to me: “There is no greater sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than to be mindful of the happy time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In misery, and that thy Teacher knows.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, if to recognise the earliest root</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of love in us thou hast so great desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I will do even as he who weeps and speaks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One day we reading were for our delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Launcelot, how Love did him enthrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone we were and without any fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full many a time our eyes together drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That reading, and drove the color from our faces;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one point only was it that o’ercame us.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whenas we read of the much-longed-for smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being by such a noble lover kissed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This one, who ne’er from me shall be divided,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Kissed me upon the mouth all palpitating.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Galeotto was the book and he who wrote it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That day no farther did we read therein.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all the while one spirit uttered this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other one did weep so, that, for pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I swooned away as if I had been dying,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And fell, even as a dead body falls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Third Circle.⁠—Cerberus.⁠—The Gluttonous.⁠—The Eternal Rain.⁠—Ciacco</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>At the return of consciousness, that closed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the pity of those two relations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which utterly with sadness had confused me,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>New torments I behold, and new tormented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around me, whichsoever way I move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whichsoever way I turn, and gaze.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In the third circle am I of the rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eternal, maledict, and cold, and heavy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its law and quality are never new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Huge hail, and water sombre-hued, and snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Athwart the tenebrous air pour down amain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noisome the earth is, that receiveth this.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cerberus, monster cruel and uncouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his three gullets like a dog is barking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the people that are there submerged.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Red eyes he has, and unctuous beard and black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And belly large, and armed with claws his hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rends the spirits, flays, and quarters them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Howl the rain maketh them like unto dogs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One side they make a shelter for the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft turn themselves the wretched reprobates.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Cerberus perceived us, the great worm!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mouths he opened, and displayed his tusks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not a limb had he that was motionless.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And my Conductor, with his spans extended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took of the earth, and with his fists well filled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He threw it into those rapacious gullets.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such as that dog is, who by barking craves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quiet grows soon as his food he gnaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For to devour it he but thinks and struggles,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The like became those muzzles filth-begrimed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Cerberus the demon, who so thunders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the souls that they would fain be deaf.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We passed across the shadows, which subdues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavy rain-storm, and we placed our feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their vanity that person seems.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all were lying prone upon the earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excepting one, who sat upright as soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he beheld us passing on before him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou that art conducted through this Hell,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He said to me, “recall me, if thou canst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thyself wast made before I was unmade.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I to him: “The anguish which thou hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps doth draw thee out of my remembrance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seems not I have ever seen thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But tell me who thou art, that in so doleful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A place art put, and in such punishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If some are greater, none is so displeasing.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Thy city, which is full</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of envy so that now the sack runs over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held me within it in the life serene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You citizens were wont to call me Ciacco;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the pernicious sin of gluttony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I, as thou seest, am battered by this rain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I, sad soul, am not the only one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all these suffer the like penalty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the like sin;” and word no more spake he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I answered him: “Ciacco, thy wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weighs on me so that it to weep invites me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But tell me, if thou knowest, to what shall come</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The citizens of the divided city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any there be just; and the occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell me why so much discord has assailed it.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “They, after long contention,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will come to bloodshed; and the rustic party</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will drive the other out with much offence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then afterwards behoves it this one fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within three suns, and rise again the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By force of him who now is on the coast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High will it hold its forehead a long while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeping the other under heavy burdens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howe’er it weeps thereat and is indignant.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The just are two, and are not understood there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy and Arrogance and Avarice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are the three sparks that have all hearts enkindled.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here ended he his tearful utterance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I to him: “I wish thee still to teach me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a gift to me of further speech.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Farinata and Tegghiaio, once so worthy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others who on good deeds set their thoughts,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Say where they are, and cause that I may know them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For great desire constraineth me to learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Heaven doth sweeten them, or Hell envenom.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he: “They are among the blacker souls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A different sin downweighs them to the bottom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If thou so far descendest, thou canst see them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But when thou art again in the sweet world,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I pray thee to the mind of others bring me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more I tell thee and no more I answer.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then his straightforward eyes he turned askance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eyed me a little, and then bowed his head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell therewith prone like the other blind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the Guide said to me: “He wakes no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This side the sound of the angelic trumpet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When shall approach the hostile Potentate,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each one shall find again his dismal tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall reassume his flesh and his own figure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall hear what through eternity re-echoes.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So we passed onward o’er the filthy mixture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of shadows and of rain with footsteps slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Touching a little on the future life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore I said: “Master, these torments here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will they increase after the mighty sentence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or lesser be, or will they be as burning?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Return unto thy science,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which wills, that as the thing more perfect is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more it feels of pleasure and of pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Albeit that this people maledict</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To true perfection never can attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hereafter more than now they look to be.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Round in a circle by that road we went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speaking much more, which I do not repeat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came unto the point where the descent is;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There we found Plutus the great enemy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fourth Circle.⁠—Plutus.⁠—The Avaricious and the Prodigal.⁠—Fortune and her Wheel.⁠—The Fifth Circle.⁠—Styx.⁠—The Irascible and the Sullen</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Papë Satàn, Papë Satàn, Aleppë!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus Plutus with his clucking voice began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that benignant Sage, who all things knew,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said, to encourage me: “Let not thy fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Harm thee; for any power that he may have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall not prevent thy going down this crag.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then he turned round unto that bloated lip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Be silent, thou accursed wolf;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consume within thyself with thine own rage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not causeless is this journey to the abyss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus is it willed on high, where Michael wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vengeance upon the proud adultery.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as the sails inflated by the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Involved together fall when snaps the mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So fell the cruel monster to the earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus we descended into the fourth chasm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gaining still farther on the dolesome shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which all the woe of the universe insacks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Justice of God, ah! who heaps up so many</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New toils and sufferings as I beheld?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why doth our transgression waste us so?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As doth the billow there upon Charybdis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That breaks itself on that which it encounters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So here the folk must dance their roundelay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here saw I people, more than elsewhere, many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one side and the other, with great howls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rolling weights forward by main force of chest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They clashed together, and then at that point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each one turned backward, rolling retrograde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crying, “Why keepest?” and, “Why squanderest thou?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus they returned along the lurid circle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On either hand unto the opposite point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shouting their shameful metre evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then each, when he arrived there, wheeled about</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through his half-circle to another joust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, who had my heart pierced as it were,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Exclaimed: “My Master, now declare to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What people these are, and if all were clerks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These shaven crowns upon the left of us.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “All of them were asquint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In intellect in the first life, so much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there with measure they no spending made.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Clearly enough their voices bark it forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er they reach the two points of the circle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where sunders them the opposite defect.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Clerks those were who no hairy covering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have on the head, and Popes and Cardinals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In whom doth Avarice practise its excess.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I: “My Master, among such as these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I ought forsooth to recognise some few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were infected with these maladies.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Vain thought thou entertainest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The undiscerning life which made them sordid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now makes them unto all discernment dim.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forever shall they come to these two buttings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These from the sepulchre shall rise again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the fist closed, and these with tresses shorn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ill giving and ill keeping the fair world</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have ta’en from them, and placed them in this scuffle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er it be, no words adorn I for it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now canst thou, Son, behold the transient farce</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of goods that are committed unto Fortune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which the human race each other buffet;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For all the gold that is beneath the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ever has been, of these weary souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could never make a single one repose.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Master,” I said to him, “now tell me also</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is this Fortune which thou speakest of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has the world’s goods so within its clutches?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “O creatures imbecile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ignorance is this which doth beset you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now will I have thee learn my judgment of her.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He whose omniscience everything transcends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heavens created, and gave who should guide them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That every part to every part may shine,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Distributing the light in equal measure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He in like manner to the mundane splendors</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ordained a general ministress and guide,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That she might change at times the empty treasures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From race to race, from one blood to another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond resistance of all human wisdom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore one people triumphs, and another</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Languishes, in pursuance of her judgment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hidden is, as in the grass a serpent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Your knowledge has no counterstand against her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She makes provision, judges, and pursues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her governance, as theirs the other gods.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her permutations have not any truce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Necessity makes her precipitate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So often cometh who his turn obtains.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And this is she who is so crucified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even by those who ought to give her praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Giving her blame amiss, and bad repute.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But she is blissful, and she hears it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the other primal creatures gladsome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She turns her sphere, and blissful she rejoices.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let us descend now unto greater woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Already sinks each star that was ascending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I set out, and loitering is forbidden.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We crossed the circle to the other bank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Near to a fount that boils, and pours itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along a gully that runs out of it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The water was more sombre far than perse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we, in company with the dusky waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made entrance downward by a path uncouth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A marsh it makes, which has the name of Styx,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This tristful brooklet, when it has descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down to the foot of the malign gray shores.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I, who stood intent upon beholding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw people mud-besprent in that lagoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All of them naked and with angry look.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They smote each other not alone with hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with the head and with the breast and feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Said the good Master: “Son, thou now beholdest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The souls of those whom anger overcame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And likewise I would have thee know for certain</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beneath the water people are who sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make this water bubble at the surface,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the eye tells thee wheresoe’er it turns.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fixed in the mire they say, ‘We sullen were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the sweet air, which by the sun is gladdened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bearing within ourselves the sluggish reek;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now we are sullen in this sable mire.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hymn do they keep gurgling in their throats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For with unbroken words they cannot say it.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus we went circling round the filthy fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A great arc ’twixt the dry bank and the swamp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With eyes turned unto those who gorge the mire;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto the foot of a tower we came at last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Phlegyas.⁠—Philippe Argenti.⁠—The Gate of the City of Dis</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I say, continuing, that long before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We to the foot of that high tower had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our eyes went upward to the summit of it,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By reason of two flamelets we saw placed there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from afar another answer them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far, that hardly could the eye attain it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, to the sea of all discernment turned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said: “What sayeth this, and what respondeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That other fire? and who are they that made it?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Across the turbid waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is expected thou canst now discern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If reek of the morass conceal it not.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cord never shot an arrow from itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sped away athwart the air so swift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I beheld a very little boat</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come o’er the water tow’rds us at that moment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under the guidance of a single pilot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shouted, “Now art thou arrived, fell soul?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Phlegyas, Phlegyas, thou criest out in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this once,” said my Lord; “thou shalt not have us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Longer than in the passing of the slough.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As he who listens to some great deceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That has been done to him, and then resents it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such became Phlegyas, in his gathered wrath.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My Guide descended down into the boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then he made me enter after him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only when I entered seemed it laden.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as the Guide and I were in the boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The antique prow goes on its way, dividing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More of the water than ’t is wont with others.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While we were running through the dead canal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uprose in front of me one full of mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said, “Who ‘rt thou that comest ere the hour?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I to him: “Although I come, I stay not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But who art thou that hast become so squalid?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Thou seest that I am one who weeps,” he answered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I to him: “With weeping and with wailing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou spirit maledict, do thou remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For thee I know, though thou art all defiled.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then stretched he both his hands unto the boat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereat my wary Master thrust him back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Away there with the other dogs!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thereafter with his arms he clasped my neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He kissed my face, and said: “Disdainful soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blessed be she who bore thee in her bosom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That was an arrogant person in the world;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goodness is none, that decks his memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise here his shade is furious.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How many are esteemed great kings up there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who here shall be like unto swine in mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving behind them horrible dispraises!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I: “My Master, much should I be pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I could see him soused into this broth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before we issue forth out of the lake.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Ere unto thee the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reveal itself, thou shalt be satisfied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such a desire ’t is meet thou shouldst enjoy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little after that, I saw such havoc</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made of him by the people of the mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That still I praise and thank my God for it.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They all were shouting, “At Philippo Argenti!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that exasperate spirit Florentine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned round upon himself with his own teeth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We left him there, and more of him I tell not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on mine ears there smote a lamentation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence forward I intent unbar mine eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the good Master said: “Even now, my son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city draweth near whose name is Dis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the grave citizens, with the great throng.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I: “Its mosques already, Master, clearly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within there in the valley I discern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vermilion, as if issuing from the fire</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They were.” And he to me: “The fire eternal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That kindles them within makes them look red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As thou beholdest in this nether Hell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then we arrived within the moats profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That circumvallate that disconsolate city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The walls appeared to me to be of iron.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not without making first a circuit wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We came unto a place where loud the pilot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cried out to us, “Debark, here is the entrance.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More than a thousand at the gates I saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of the Heavens rained down, who angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were saying, “Who is this that without death</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Goes through the kingdom of the people dead?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my sagacious Master made a sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wishing secretly to speak with them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little then they quelled their great disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said: “Come thou alone, and he begone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who has so boldly entered these dominions.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Let him return alone by his mad road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Try, if he can; for thou shalt here remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who hast escorted him through such dark regions.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Think, Reader, if I was discomforted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At utterance of the accursed words;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For never to return here I believed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O my dear Guide, who more than seven times</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hast rendered me security, and drawn me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From imminent peril that before me stood,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Do not desert me,” said I, “thus undone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if the going farther be denied us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let us retrace our steps together swiftly.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And that Lord, who had led me thitherward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “Fear not; because our passage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None can take from us, it by Such is given.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But here await me, and thy weary spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Comfort and nourish with a better hope;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For in this nether world I will not leave thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So onward goes and there abandons me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Father sweet, and I remain in doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For No and Yes within my head contend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I could not hear what he proposed to them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with them there he did not linger long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere each within in rivalry ran back.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They closed the portals, those our adversaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On my Lord’s breast, who had remained without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned to me with footsteps far between.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His eyes cast down, his forehead shorn had he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all its boldness, and he said, with sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Who has denied to me the dolesome houses?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And unto me: “Thou, because I am angry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fear not, for I will conquer in the trial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever for defence within be planned.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once they used it at less secret gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which finds itself without a fastening still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O’er it didst thou behold the dead inscription;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now this side of it descends the steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passing across the circles without escort,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One by whose means the city shall be opened.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Furies.⁠—The Angel.⁠—The City of Dis.⁠—The Sixth Circle.⁠—Heresiarchs</span>
				</h3>
				<p>
					<span>That hue which cowardice brought out on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholding my Conductor backward turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooner repressed within him his new color.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stopped attentive, like a man who listens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the eye could not conduct him far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through the black air, and through the heavy fog.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Still it behoveth us to win the fight,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began he; “Else … Such offered us herself …</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O how I long that some one here arrive!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well I perceived, as soon as the beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He covered up with what came afterward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were words quite different from the first;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But none the less his saying gave me fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because I carried out the broken phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps to a worse meaning than he had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Into this bottom of the doleful conch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doth any e’er descend from the first grade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for its pain has only hope cut off?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This question put I; and he answered me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Seldom it comes to pass that one of us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maketh the journey upon which I go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>True is it, once before I here below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was conjured by that pitiless Erictho,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who summoned back the shades unto their bodies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Naked of me short while the flesh had been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before within that wall she made me enter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring a spirit from the circle of Judas;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That is the lowest region and the darkest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And farthest from the heaven which circles all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well know I the way; therefore be reassured.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This fen, which a prodigious stench exhales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Encompasses about the city dolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where now we cannot enter without anger.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And more he said, but not in mind I have it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because mine eye had altogether drawn me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tow’rds the high tower with the red-flaming summit,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where in a moment saw I swift uprisen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The three infernal Furies stained with blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had the limbs of women and their mien,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with the greenest hydras were begirt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small serpents and cerastes were their tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith their horrid temples were entwined.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he who well the handmaids of the Queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of everlasting lamentation knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said unto me: “Behold the fierce Erinnys.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This is Megæra, on the left-hand side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She who is weeping on the right, Alecto;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tisiphone is between;” and then was silent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each one her breast was rending with her nails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They beat them with their palms, and cried so loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I for dread pressed close unto the Poet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Medusa come, so we to stone will change him!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All shouted looking down; “in evil hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Avenged we not on Theseus his assault!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Turn thyself round, and keep thine eyes close shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if the Gorgon appear, and thou shouldst see it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more returning upward would there be.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus said the Master; and he turned me round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself, and trusted not unto my hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So far as not to blind me with his own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O ye who have undistempered intellects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Observe the doctrine that conceals itself</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the veil of the mysterious verses!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now there came across the turbid waves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clangor of a sound with terror fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because of which both of the margins trembled;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not otherwise it was than of a wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Impetuous on account of adverse heats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That smites the forest, and, without restraint,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The branches rends, beats down, and bears away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right onward, laden with dust, it goes superb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And puts to flight the wild beasts and the shepherds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mine eyes he loosed, and said: “Direct the nerve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of vision now along that ancient foam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There yonder where that smoke is most intense.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as the frogs before the hostile serpent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Across the water scatter all abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until each one is huddled in the earth,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More than a thousand ruined souls I saw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus fleeing from before one who on foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was passing o’er the Styx with soles unwet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From off his face he fanned that unctuous air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waving his left hand oft in front of him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only with that anguish seemed he weary.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Well I perceived one sent from Heaven was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the Master turned; and he made sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I should quiet stand, and bow before him.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! how disdainful he appeared to me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He reached the gate, and with a little rod</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He opened it, for there was no resistance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O banished out of Heaven, people despised!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus he began upon the horrid threshold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Whence is this arrogance within you couched?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore recalcitrate against that will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which the end can never be cut off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And which has many times increased your pain?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What helpeth it to butt against the fates?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your Cerberus, if you remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that still bears his chin and gullet peeled.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then he returned along the miry road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spake no word to us, but had the look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one whom other care constrains and goads</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Than that of him who in his presence is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we our feet directed tow’rds the city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After those holy words all confident.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within we entered without any contest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I, who inclination had to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What the condition such a fortress holds,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as I was within, cast round mine eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see on every hand an ample plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full of distress and torment terrible.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Arles</span>, where stagnant grows the Rhone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Pola</span> near to the Quarnaro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That shuts in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span> and bathes its borders,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sepulchres make all the place uneven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So likewise did they there on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving that there the manner was more bitter;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For flames between the sepulchres were scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which they so intensely heated were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That iron more so asks not any art.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All of their coverings uplifted were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And from them issued forth such dire laments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooth seemed they of the wretched and tormented.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And I: “My Master, what are all those people</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, having sepulture within those tombs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make themselves audible by doleful sighs?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he to me: “Here are the Heresiarchs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their disciples of all sects, and much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than thou thinkest laden are the tombs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here like together with its like is buried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more and less the monuments are heated.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he to the right had turned, we passed</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Between the torments and high parapets.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Farinata and Cavalcante de’ Cavalcanti</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Now onward goes, along a narrow path<br/> Between the torments and the city wall,<br/> My Master, and I follow at his back.<br/></p>
				<p>“O power supreme, that through these impious circles<br/> Turnest me,” I began, “as pleases thee,<br/> Speak to me, and my longings satisfy;<br/></p>
				<p>The people who are lying in these tombs,<br/> Might they be seen? already are uplifted<br/> The covers all, and no one keepeth guard.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “They all will be closed up<br/> When from Jehoshaphat they shall return<br/> Here with the bodies they have left above.<br/></p>
				<p>Their cemetery have upon this side<br/> With Epicurus all his followers,<br/> Who with the body mortal make the soul;<br/></p>
				<p>But in the question thou dost put to me,<br/> Within here shalt thou soon be satisfied,<br/> And likewise in the wish thou keepest silent.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “Good Leader, I but keep concealed<br/> From thee my heart, that I may speak the less,<br/> Nor only now hast thou thereto disposed me.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O Tuscan, thou who through the city of fire<br/> Goest alive, thus speaking modestly,<br/> Be pleased to stay thy footsteps in this place.<br/></p>
				<p>Thy mode of speaking makes thee manifest<br/> A native of that noble fatherland,<br/> To which perhaps I too molestful was.”<br/></p>
				<p>Upon a sudden issued forth this sound<br/> From out one of the tombs; wherefore I pressed,<br/> Fearing, a little nearer to my Leader.<br/></p>
				<p>And unto me he said: “Turn thee; what dost thou?<br/> Behold there Farinata who has risen;<br/> From the waist upwards wholly shalt thou see him.”<br/></p>
				<p>I had already fixed mine eyes on his,<br/> And he uprose erect with breast and front<br/> E’en as if Hell he had in great despite.<br/></p>
				<p>And with courageous hands and prompt my Leader<br/> Thrust me between the sepulchres towards him,<br/> Exclaiming, “Let thy words explicit be.”<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as I was at the foot of his tomb<br/> Somewhat he eyed me, and, as if disdainful,<br/> Then asked of me, “Who were thine ancestors?”<br/></p>
				<p>I, who desirous of obeying was,<br/> Concealed it not, but all revealed to him;<br/> Whereat he raised his brows a little upward.<br/></p>
				<p>Then said he: “Fiercely adverse have they been<br/> To me, and to my fathers, and my party;<br/> So that two several times I scattered them.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If they were banished, they returned on all sides,”<br/> I answered him, “the first time and the second;<br/> But yours have not acquired that art aright.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then there uprose upon the sight, uncovered<br/> Down to the chin, a shadow at his side;<br/> I think that he had risen on his knees.<br/></p>
				<p>Round me he gazed, as if solicitude<br/> He had to see if some one else were with me,<br/> But after his suspicion was all spent,<br/></p>
				<p>Weeping, he said to me: “If through this blind<br/> Prison thou goest by loftiness of genius,<br/> Where is my son? and why is he not with thee?”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “I come not of myself;<br/> He who is waiting yonder leads me here,<br/> Whom in disdain perhaps your Guido had.”<br/></p>
				<p>His language and the mode of punishment<br/> Already unto me had read his name;<br/> On that account my answer was so full.<br/></p>
				<p>Up starting suddenly, he cried out: “How<br/> Saidst thou⁠—he had? Is he not still alive?<br/> Does not the sweet light strike upon his eyes?”<br/></p>
				<p>When he became aware of some delay,<br/> Which I before my answer made, supine<br/> He fell again, and forth appeared no more.<br/></p>
				<p>But the other, magnanimous, at whose desire<br/> I had remained, did not his aspect change,<br/> Neither his neck he moved, nor bent his side.<br/></p>
				<p>“And if,” continuing his first discourse,<br/> “They have that art,” he said, “not learned aright,<br/> That more tormenteth me, than doth this bed.<br/></p>
				<p>But fifty times shall not rekindled be<br/> The countenance of the Lady who reigns here,<br/> Ere thou shalt know how heavy is that art;<br/></p>
				<p>And as thou wouldst to the sweet world return,<br/> Say why that people is so pitiless<br/> Against my race in each one of its laws?”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I to him: “The slaughter and great carnage<br/> Which have with crimson stained the Arbia, cause<br/> Such orisons in our temple to be made.”<br/></p>
				<p>After his head he with a sigh had shaken,<br/> “There I was not alone,” he said, “nor surely<br/> Without a cause had with the others moved.<br/></p>
				<p>But there I was alone, where every one<br/> Consented to the laying waste of Florence,<br/> He who defended her with open face.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Ah! so hereafter may your seed repose,”<br/> I him entreated, “solve for me that knot,<br/> Which has entangled my conceptions here.<br/></p>
				<p>It seems that you can see, if I hear rightly,<br/> Beforehand whatsoe’er time brings with it,<br/> And in the present have another mode.”<br/></p>
				<p>“We see, like those who have imperfect sight,<br/> The things,” he said, “that distant are from us;<br/> So much still shines on us the Sovereign Ruler.<br/></p>
				<p>When they draw near, or are, is wholly vain<br/> Our intellect, and if none brings it to us,<br/> Not anything know we of your human state.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence thou canst understand, that wholly dead<br/> Will be our knowledge from the moment when<br/> The portal of the future shall be closed.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then I, as if compunctious for my fault,<br/> Said: “Now, then, you will tell that fallen one,<br/> That still his son is with the living joined.<br/></p>
				<p>And if just now, in answering, I was dumb,<br/> Tell him I did it because I was thinking<br/> Already of the error you have solved me.”<br/></p>
				<p>And now my Master was recalling me,<br/> Wherefore more eagerly I prayed the spirit<br/> That he would tell me who was with him there.<br/></p>
				<p>He said: “With more than a thousand here I lie;<br/> Within here is the second Frederick,<br/> And the Cardinal, and of the rest I speak not.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thereon he hid himself; and I towards<br/> The ancient poet turned my steps, reflecting<br/> Upon that saying, which seemed hostile to me.<br/></p>
				<p>He moved along; and afterward thus going,<br/> He said to me, “Why art thou so bewildered?”<br/> And I in his inquiry satisfied him.<br/></p>
				<p>“Let memory preserve what thou hast heard<br/> Against thyself,” that Sage commanded me,<br/> “And now attend here;” and he raised his finger.<br/></p>
				<p>“When thou shalt be before the radiance sweet<br/> Of her whose beauteous eyes all things behold,<br/> From her thou’lt know the journey of thy life.”<br/></p>
				<p>Unto the left hand then he turned his feet;<br/> We left the wall, and went towards the middle,<br/> Along a path that strikes into a valley,<br/></p>
				<p>Which even up there unpleasant made its stench.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Pope Anastasius.⁠—General Description of the Inferno and its Divisions</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Upon the margin of a lofty bank<br/> Which great rocks broken in a circle made,<br/> We came upon a still more cruel throng;<br/></p>
				<p>And there, by reason of the horrible<br/> Excess of stench the deep abyss throws out,<br/> We drew ourselves aside behind the cover<br/></p>
				<p>Of a great tomb, whereon I saw a writing,<br/> Which said: “Pope Anastasius I hold,<br/> Whom out of the right way Photinus drew.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Slow it behoveth our descent to be,<br/> So that the sense be first a little used<br/> To the sad blast, and then we shall not heed it.”<br/></p>
				<p>The Master thus; and unto him I said,<br/> “Some compensation find, that the time pass not<br/> Idly;” and he: “Thou seest I think of that.<br/></p>
				<p>My son, upon the inside of these rocks,”<br/> Began he then to say, “are three small circles,<br/> From grade to grade, like those which thou art leaving.<br/></p>
				<p>They all are full of spirits maledict;<br/> But that hereafter sight alone suffice thee,<br/> Hear how and wherefore they are in constraint.<br/></p>
				<p>Of every malice that wins hate in Heaven,<br/> Injury is the end; and all such end<br/> Either by force or fraud afflicteth others.<br/></p>
				<p>But because fraud is man’s peculiar vice,<br/> More it displeases God; and so stand lowest<br/> The fraudulent, and greater dole assails them.<br/></p>
				<p>All the first circle of the Violent is;<br/> But since force may be used against three persons,<br/> In three rounds ’tis divided and constructed.<br/></p>
				<p>To God, to ourselves, and to our neighbour can we<br/> Use force; I say on them and on their things,<br/> As thou shalt hear with reason manifest.<br/></p>
				<p>A death by violence, and painful wounds,<br/> Are to our neighbour given; and in his substance<br/> Ruin, and arson, and injurious levies;<br/></p>
				<p>Whence homicides, and he who smites unjustly,<br/> Marauders, and freebooters, the first round<br/> Tormenteth all in companies diverse.<br/></p>
				<p>Man may lay violent hands upon himself<br/> And his own goods; and therefore in the second<br/> Round must perforce without avail repent<br/></p>
				<p>Whoever of your world deprives himself,<br/> Who games, and dissipates his property,<br/> And weepeth there, where he should jocund be.<br/></p>
				<p>Violence can be done the Deity,<br/> In heart denying and blaspheming Him,<br/> And by disdaining Nature and her bounty.<br/></p>
				<p>And for this reason doth the smallest round<br/> Seal with its signet Sodom and Cahors,<br/> And who, disdaining God, speaks from the heart.<br/></p>
				<p>Fraud, wherewithal is every conscience stung,<br/> A man may practise upon him who trusts,<br/> And him who doth no confidence imburse.<br/></p>
				<p>This latter mode, it would appear, dissevers<br/> Only the bond of love which Nature makes;<br/> Wherefore within the second circle nestle<br/></p>
				<p>Hypocrisy, flattery, and who deals in magic,<br/> Falsification, theft, and simony,<br/> Panders, and barrators, and the like filth.<br/></p>
				<p>By the other mode, forgotten is that love<br/> Which Nature makes, and what is after added,<br/> From which there is a special faith engendered.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence in the smallest circle, where the point is<br/> Of the Universe, upon which Dis is seated,<br/> Whoe’er betrays for ever is consumed.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “My Master, clear enough proceeds<br/> Thy reasoning, and full well distinguishes<br/> This cavern and the people who possess it.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me, those within the fat lagoon,<br/> Whom the wind drives, and whom the rain doth beat,<br/> And who encounter with such bitter tongues,<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore are they inside of the red city<br/> Not punished, if God has them in his wrath,<br/> And if he has not, wherefore in such fashion?”<br/></p>
				<p>And unto me he said: “Why wanders so<br/> Thine intellect from that which it is wont?<br/> Or, sooth, thy mind where is it elsewhere looking?<br/></p>
				<p>Hast thou no recollection of those words<br/> With which thine Ethics thoroughly discusses<br/> The dispositions three, that Heaven abides not⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>Incontinence, and Malice, and insane<br/> Bestiality? and how Incontinence<br/> Less God offendeth, and less blame attracts?<br/></p>
				<p>If thou regardest this conclusion well,<br/> And to thy mind recallest who they are<br/> That up outside are undergoing penance,<br/></p>
				<p>Clearly wilt thou perceive why from these felons<br/> They separated are, and why less wroth<br/> Justice divine doth smite them with its hammer.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O Sun, that healest all distempered vision,<br/> Thou dost content me so, when thou resolvest,<br/> That doubting pleases me no less than knowing!<br/></p>
				<p>Once more a little backward turn thee,” said I,<br/> “There where thou sayest that usury offends<br/> Goodness divine, and disengage the knot.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Philosophy,” he said, “to him who heeds it,<br/> Noteth, not only in one place alone,<br/> After what manner Nature takes her course<br/></p>
				<p>From Intellect Divine, and from its art;<br/> And if thy Physics carefully thou notest,<br/> After not many pages shalt thou find,<br/></p>
				<p>That this your art as far as possible<br/> Follows, as the disciple doth the master;<br/> So that your art is, as it were, God’s grandchild.<br/></p>
				<p>From these two, if thou bringest to thy mind<br/> Genesis at the beginning, it behoves<br/> Mankind to gain their life and to advance;<br/></p>
				<p>And since the usurer takes another way,<br/> Nature herself and in her follower<br/> Disdains he, for elsewhere he puts his hope.<br/></p>
				<p>But follow, now, as I would fain go on,<br/> For quivering are the Fishes on the horizon,<br/> And the Wain wholly over Caurus lies,<br/></p>
				<p>And far beyond there we descend the crag.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Minotaur.⁠—The Seventh Circle.⁠—The Violent.⁠—Phlegethon.⁠—The Violent against their Neighbors.⁠—The Centaurs.⁠—Tyrants</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The place where to descend the bank we came<br/> Was alpine, and from what was there, moreover,<br/> Of such a kind that every eye would shun it.<br/></p>
				<p>Such as that ruin is which in the flank<br/> Smote, on this side of Trent, the Adige,<br/> Either by earthquake or by failing stay,<br/></p>
				<p>For from the mountain’s top, from which it moved,<br/> Unto the plain the cliff is shattered so,<br/> Some path ’twould give to him who was above;<br/></p>
				<p>Even such was the descent of that ravine,<br/> And on the border of the broken chasm<br/> The infamy of Crete was stretched along,<br/></p>
				<p>Who was conceived in the fictitious cow;<br/> And when he us beheld, he bit himself,<br/> Even as one whom anger racks within.<br/></p>
				<p>My Sage towards him shouted: “Peradventure<br/> Thou think’st that here may be the Duke of Athens,<br/> Who in the world above brought death to thee?<br/></p>
				<p>Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not<br/> Instructed by thy sister, but he comes<br/> In order to behold your punishments.”<br/></p>
				<p>As is that bull who breaks loose at the moment<br/> In which he has received the mortal blow,<br/> Who cannot walk, but staggers here and there,<br/></p>
				<p>The Minotaur beheld I do the like;<br/> And he, the wary, cried: “Run to the passage;<br/> While he wroth, ’tis well thou shouldst descend.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus down we took our way o’er that discharge<br/> Of stones, which oftentimes did move themselves<br/> Beneath my feet, from the unwonted burden.<br/></p>
				<p>Thoughtful I went; and he said: “Thou art thinking<br/> Perhaps upon this ruin, which is guarded<br/> By that brute anger which just now I quenched.<br/></p>
				<p>Now will I have thee know, the other time<br/> I here descended to the nether Hell,<br/> This precipice had not yet fallen down.<br/></p>
				<p>But truly, if I well discern, a little<br/> Before His coming who the mighty spoil<br/> Bore off from Dis, in the supernal circle,<br/></p>
				<p>Upon all sides the deep and loathsome valley<br/> Trembled so, that I thought the Universe<br/> Was thrilled with love, by which there are who think<br/></p>
				<p>The world ofttimes converted into chaos;<br/> And at that moment this primeval crag<br/> Both here and elsewhere made such overthrow.<br/></p>
				<p>But fix thine eyes below; for draweth near<br/> The river of blood, within which boiling is<br/> Whoe’er by violence doth injure others.”<br/></p>
				<p>O blind cupidity, O wrath insane,<br/> That spurs us onward so in our short life,<br/> And in the eternal then so badly steeps us!<br/></p>
				<p>I saw an ample moat bent like a bow,<br/> As one which all the plain encompasses,<br/> Conformable to what my Guide had said.<br/></p>
				<p>And between this and the embankment’s foot<br/> Centaurs in file were running, armed with arrows,<br/> As in the world they used the chase to follow.<br/></p>
				<p>Beholding us descend, each one stood still,<br/> And from the squadron three detached themselves,<br/> With bows and arrows in advance selected;<br/></p>
				<p>And from afar one cried: “Unto what torment<br/> Come ye, who down the hillside are descending?<br/> Tell us from there; if not, I draw the bow.”<br/></p>
				<p>My Master said: “Our answer will we make<br/> To Chiron, near you there; in evil hour,<br/> That will of thine was evermore so hasty.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then touched he me, and said: “This one is Nessus,<br/> Who perished for the lovely Dejanira,<br/> And for himself, himself did vengeance take.<br/></p>
				<p>And he in the midst, who at his breast is gazing,<br/> Is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles;<br/> That other Pholus is, who was so wrathful.<br/></p>
				<p>Thousands and thousands go about the moat<br/> Shooting with shafts whatever soul emerges<br/> Out of the blood, more than his crime allots.”<br/></p>
				<p>Near we approached unto those monsters fleet;<br/> Chiron an arrow took, and with the notch<br/> Backward upon his jaws he put his beard.<br/></p>
				<p>After he had uncovered his great mouth,<br/> He said to his companions: “Are you ware<br/> That he behind moveth whate’er he touches?<br/></p>
				<p>Thus are not wont to do the feet of dead men.”<br/> And my good Guide, who now was at his breast,<br/> Where the two natures are together joined,<br/></p>
				<p>Replied: “Indeed he lives, and thus alone<br/> Me it behoves to show him the dark valley;<br/> Necessity, and not delight, impels us.<br/></p>
				<p>Some one withdrew from singing Halleluja,<br/> Who unto me committed this new office;<br/> No thief is he, nor I a thievish spirit.<br/></p>
				<p>But by that virtue through which I am moving<br/> My steps along this savage thoroughfare,<br/> Give us some one of thine, to be with us,<br/></p>
				<p>And who may show us where to pass the ford,<br/> And who may carry this one on his back;<br/> For ’tis no spirit that can walk the air.”<br/></p>
				<p>Upon his right breast Chiron wheeled about,<br/> And said to Nessus: “Turn and do thou guide them,<br/> And warn aside, if other band may meet you.”<br/></p>
				<p>We with our faithful escort onward moved<br/> Along the brink of the vermilion boiling,<br/> Wherein the boiled were uttering loud laments.<br/></p>
				<p>People I saw within up to the eyebrows,<br/> And the great Centaur said: “Tyrants are these,<br/> Who dealt in bloodshed and in pillaging.<br/></p>
				<p>Here they lament their pitiless mischiefs; here<br/> Is Alexander, and fierce Dionysius<br/> Who upon Sicily brought dolorous years.<br/></p>
				<p>That forehead there which has the hair so black<br/> Is Azzolin; and the other who is blond,<br/> Obizzo is of Esti, who, in truth,<br/></p>
				<p>Up in the world was by his stepson slain.”<br/> Then turned I to the Poet; and he said,<br/> “Now he be first to thee, and second I.”<br/></p>
				<p>A little farther on the Centaur stopped<br/> Above a folk, who far down as the throat<br/> Seemed from that boiling stream to issue forth.<br/></p>
				<p>A shade he showed us on one side alone,<br/> Saying: “He cleft asunder in God’s bosom<br/> The heart that still upon the Thames is honoured.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then people saw I, who from out the river<br/> Lifted their heads and also all the chest;<br/> And many among these I recognised.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus ever more and more grew shallower<br/> That blood, so that the feet alone it covered;<br/> And there across the moat our passage was.<br/></p>
				<p>“Even as thou here upon this side beholdest<br/> The boiling stream, that aye diminishes,”<br/> The Centaur said, “I wish thee to believe<br/></p>
				<p>That on this other more and more declines<br/> Its bed, until it reunites itself<br/> Where it behoveth tyranny to groan.<br/></p>
				<p>Justice divine, upon this side, is goading<br/> That Attila, who was a scourge on earth,<br/> And Pyrrhus, and Sextus; and for ever milks<br/></p>
				<p>The tears which with the boiling it unseals<br/> In Rinier da Corneto and Rinier Pazzo,<br/> Who made upon the highways so much war.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then back he turned, and passed again the ford.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Wood of Thorns.⁠—The Harpies.⁠—The Violent against themselves.⁠—Suicides.⁠—Pier della Vigna.⁠—Lano and Jacopo da Sant’ Andrea</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Not yet had Nessus reached the other side,<br/> When we had put ourselves within a wood,<br/> That was not marked by any path whatever.<br/></p>
				<p>Not foliage green, but of a dusky colour,<br/> Not branches smooth, but gnarled and intertangled,<br/> Not apple-trees were there, but thorns with poison.<br/></p>
				<p>Such tangled thickets have not, nor so dense,<br/> Those savage wild beasts, that in hatred hold<br/> ’Twixt Cecina and Corneto the tilled places.<br/></p>
				<p>There do the hideous Harpies make their nests,<br/> Who chased the Trojans from the Strophades,<br/> With sad announcement of impending doom;<br/></p>
				<p>Broad wings have they, and necks and faces human,<br/> And feet with claws, and their great bellies fledged;<br/> They make laments upon the wondrous trees.<br/></p>
				<p>And the good Master: “Ere thou enter farther,<br/> Know that thou art within the second round,”<br/> Thus he began to say, “and shalt be, till<br/></p>
				<p>Thou comest out upon the horrible sand;<br/> Therefore look well around, and thou shalt see<br/> Things that will credence give unto my speech.”<br/></p>
				<p>I heard on all sides lamentations uttered,<br/> And person none beheld I who might make them,<br/> Whence, utterly bewildered, I stood still.<br/></p>
				<p>I think he thought that I perhaps might think<br/> So many voices issued through those trunks<br/> From people who concealed themselves from us;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore the Master said: “If thou break off<br/> Some little spray from any of these trees,<br/> The thoughts thou hast will wholly be made vain.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then stretched I forth my hand a little forward,<br/> And plucked a branchlet off from a great thorn;<br/> And the trunk cried, “Why dost thou mangle me?”<br/></p>
				<p>After it had become embrowned with blood,<br/> It recommenced its cry: “Why dost thou rend me?<br/> Hast thou no spirit of pity whatsoever?<br/></p>
				<p>Men once we were, and now are changed to trees;<br/> Indeed, thy hand should be more pitiful,<br/> Even if the souls of serpents we had been.”<br/></p>
				<p>As out of a green brand, that is on fire<br/> At one of the ends, and from the other drips<br/> And hisses with the wind that is escaping;<br/></p>
				<p>So from that splinter issued forth together<br/> Both words and blood; whereat I let the tip<br/> Fall, and stood like a man who is afraid.<br/></p>
				<p>“Had he been able sooner to believe,”<br/> My Sage made answer, “O thou wounded soul,<br/> What only in my verses he has seen,<br/></p>
				<p>Not upon thee had he stretched forth his hand;<br/> Whereas the thing incredible has caused me<br/> To put him to an act which grieveth me.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell him who thou wast, so that by way<br/> Of some amends thy fame he may refresh<br/> Up in the world, to which he can return.”<br/></p>
				<p>And the trunk said: “So thy sweet words allure me,<br/> I cannot silent be; and you be vexed not,<br/> That I a little to discourse am tempted.<br/></p>
				<p>I am the one who both keys had in keeping<br/> Of Frederick’s heart, and turned them to and fro<br/> So softly in unlocking and in locking,<br/></p>
				<p>That from his secrets most men I withheld;<br/> Fidelity I bore the glorious office<br/> So great, I lost thereby my sleep and pulses.<br/></p>
				<p>The courtesan who never from the dwelling<br/> Of Caesar turned aside her strumpet eyes,<br/> Death universal and the vice of courts,<br/></p>
				<p>Inflamed against me all the other minds,<br/> And they, inflamed, did so inflame Augustus,<br/> That my glad honours turned to dismal mournings.<br/></p>
				<p>My spirit, in disdainful exultation,<br/> Thinking by dying to escape disdain,<br/> Made me unjust against myself, the just.<br/></p>
				<p>I, by the roots unwonted of this wood,<br/> Do swear to you that never broke I faith<br/> Unto my lord, who was so worthy of honour;<br/></p>
				<p>And to the world if one of you return,<br/> Let him my memory comfort, which is lying<br/> Still prostrate from the blow that envy dealt it.”<br/></p>
				<p>Waited awhile, and then: “Since he is silent,”<br/> The Poet said to me, “lose not the time,<br/> But speak, and question him, if more may please thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I to him: “Do thou again inquire<br/> Concerning what thou thinks’t will satisfy me;<br/> For I cannot, such pity is in my heart.”<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore he recommenced: “So may the man<br/> Do for thee freely what thy speech implores,<br/> Spirit incarcerate, again be pleased<br/></p>
				<p>To tell us in what way the soul is bound<br/> Within these knots; and tell us, if thou canst,<br/> If any from such members e’er is freed.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then blew the trunk amain, and afterward<br/> The wind was into such a voice converted:<br/> “With brevity shall be replied to you.<br/></p>
				<p>When the exasperated soul abandons<br/> The body whence it rent itself away,<br/> Minos consigns it to the seventh abyss.<br/></p>
				<p>It falls into the forest, and no part<br/> Is chosen for it; but where Fortune hurls it,<br/> There like a grain of spelt it germinates.<br/></p>
				<p>It springs a sapling, and a forest tree;<br/> The Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves,<br/> Do pain create, and for the pain an outlet.<br/></p>
				<p>Like others for our spoils shall we return;<br/> But not that any one may them revest,<br/> For ’tis not just to have what one casts off.<br/></p>
				<p>Here we shall drag them, and along the dismal<br/> Forest our bodies shall suspended be,<br/> Each to the thorn of his molested shade.”<br/></p>
				<p>We were attentive still unto the trunk,<br/> Thinking that more it yet might wish to tell us,<br/> When by a tumult we were overtaken,<br/></p>
				<p>In the same way as he is who perceives<br/> The boar and chase approaching to his stand,<br/> Who hears the crashing of the beasts and branches;<br/></p>
				<p>And two behold! upon our left-hand side,<br/> Naked and scratched, fleeing so furiously,<br/> That of the forest, every fan they broke.<br/></p>
				<p>He who was in advance: “Now help, Death, help!”<br/> And the other one, who seemed to lag too much,<br/> Was shouting: “Lano, were not so alert<br/></p>
				<p>Those legs of thine at joustings of the Toppo!”<br/> And then, perchance because his breath was failing,<br/> He grouped himself together with a bush.<br/></p>
				<p>Behind them was the forest full of black<br/> She-mastiffs, ravenous, and swift of foot<br/> As greyhounds, who are issuing from the chain.<br/></p>
				<p>On him who had crouched down they set their teeth,<br/> And him they lacerated piece by piece,<br/> Thereafter bore away those aching members.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereat my Escort took me by the hand,<br/> And led me to the bush, that all in vain<br/> Was weeping from its bloody lacerations.<br/></p>
				<p>“O Jacopo,” it said, “of Sant’ Andrea,<br/> What helped it thee of me to make a screen?<br/> What blame have I in thy nefarious life?”<br/></p>
				<p>When near him had the Master stayed his steps,<br/> He said: “Who wast thou, that through wounds so many<br/> Art blowing out with blood thy dolorous speech?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to us: “O souls, that hither come<br/> To look upon the shameful massacre<br/> That has so rent away from me my leaves,<br/></p>
				<p>Gather them up beneath the dismal bush;<br/> I of that city was which to the Baptist<br/> Changed its first patron, wherefore he for this<br/></p>
				<p>Forever with his art will make it sad.<br/> And were it not that on the pass of Arno<br/> Some glimpses of him are remaining still,<br/></p>
				<p>Those citizens, who afterwards rebuilt it<br/> Upon the ashes left by Attila,<br/> In vain had caused their labour to be done.<br/></p>
				<p>Of my own house I made myself a gibbet.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Sand Waste.⁠—The Violent against God.⁠—Capaneus.⁠—The Statue of Time, and the Four Infernal Rivers</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Because the charity of my native place<br/> Constrained me, gathered I the scattered leaves,<br/> And gave them back to him, who now was hoarse.<br/></p>
				<p>Then came we to the confine, where disparted<br/> The second round is from the third, and where<br/> A horrible form of Justice is beheld.<br/></p>
				<p>Clearly to manifest these novel things,<br/> I say that we arrived upon a plain,<br/> Which from its bed rejecteth every plant;<br/></p>
				<p>The dolorous forest is a garland to it<br/> All round about, as the sad moat to that;<br/> There close upon the edge we stayed our feet.<br/></p>
				<p>The soil was of an arid and thick sand,<br/> Not of another fashion made than that<br/> Which by the feet of Cato once was pressed.<br/></p>
				<p>Vengeance of God, O how much oughtest thou<br/> By each one to be dreaded, who doth read<br/> That which was manifest unto mine eyes!<br/></p>
				<p>Of naked souls beheld I many herds,<br/> Who all were weeping very miserably,<br/> And over them seemed set a law diverse.<br/></p>
				<p>Supine upon the ground some folk were lying;<br/> And some were sitting all drawn up together,<br/> And others went about continually.<br/></p>
				<p>Those who were going round were far the more,<br/> And those were less who lay down to their torment,<br/> But had their tongues more loosed to lamentation.<br/></p>
				<p>O’er all the sand-waste, with a gradual fall,<br/> Were raining down dilated flakes of fire,<br/> As of the snow on Alp without a wind.<br/></p>
				<p>As Alexander, in those torrid parts<br/> Of India, beheld upon his host<br/> Flames fall unbroken till they reached the ground.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he provided with his phalanxes<br/> To trample down the soil, because the vapour<br/> Better extinguished was while it was single;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus was descending the eternal heat,<br/> Whereby the sand was set on fire, like tinder<br/> Beneath the steel, for doubling of the dole.<br/></p>
				<p>Without repose forever was the dance<br/> Of miserable hands, now there, now here,<br/> Shaking away from off them the fresh gleeds.<br/></p>
				<p>“Master,” began I, “thou who overcomest<br/> All things except the demons dire, that issued<br/> Against us at the entrance of the gate,<br/></p>
				<p>Who is that mighty one who seems to heed not<br/> The fire, and lieth lowering and disdainful,<br/> So that the rain seems not to ripen him?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he himself, who had become aware<br/> That I was questioning my Guide about him,<br/> Cried: “Such as I was living, am I, dead.<br/></p>
				<p>If Jove should weary out his smith, from whom<br/> He seized in anger the sharp thunderbolt,<br/> Wherewith upon the last day I was smitten,<br/></p>
				<p>And if he wearied out by turns the others<br/> In Mongibello at the swarthy forge,<br/> Vociferating, ‘Help, good Vulcan, help!’<br/></p>
				<p>Even as he did there at the fight of Phlegra,<br/> And shot his bolts at me with all his might,<br/> He would not have thereby a joyous vengeance.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then did my Leader speak with such great force,<br/> That I had never heard him speak so loud:<br/> “O Capaneus, in that is not extinguished<br/></p>
				<p>Thine arrogance, thou punished art the more;<br/> Not any torment, saving thine own rage,<br/> Would be unto thy fury pain complete.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then he turned round to me with better lip,<br/> Saying: “One of the Seven Kings was he<br/> Who Thebes besieged, and held, and seems to hold<br/></p>
				<p>God in disdain, and little seems to prize him;<br/> But, as I said to him, his own despites<br/> Are for his breast the fittest ornaments.<br/></p>
				<p>Now follow me, and mind thou do not place<br/> As yet thy feet upon the burning sand,<br/> But always keep them close unto the wood.”<br/></p>
				<p>Speaking no word, we came to where there gushes<br/> Forth from the wood a little rivulet,<br/> Whose redness makes my hair still stand on end.<br/></p>
				<p>As from the Bulicame springs the brooklet,<br/> The sinful women later share among them,<br/> So downward through the sand it went its way.<br/></p>
				<p>The bottom of it, and both sloping banks,<br/> Were made of stone, and the margins at the side;<br/> Whence I perceived that there the passage was.<br/></p>
				<p>“In all the rest which I have shown to thee<br/> Since we have entered in within the gate<br/> Whose threshold unto no one is denied,<br/></p>
				<p>Nothing has been discovered by thine eyes<br/> So notable as is the present river,<br/> Which all the little flames above it quenches.”<br/></p>
				<p>These words were of my Leader; whence I prayed him<br/> That he would give me largess of the food,<br/> For which he had given me largess of desire.<br/></p>
				<p>“In the mid-sea there sits a wasted land,”<br/> Said he thereafterward, “whose name is Crete,<br/> Under whose king the world of old was chaste.<br/></p>
				<p>There is a mountain there, that once was glad<br/> With waters and with leaves, which was called Ida;<br/> Now ’tis deserted, as a thing worn out.<br/></p>
				<p>Rhea once chose it for the faithful cradle<br/> Of her own son; and to conceal him better,<br/> Whene’er he cried, she there had clamours made.<br/></p>
				<p>A grand old man stands in the mount erect,<br/> Who holds his shoulders turned tow’rds Damietta,<br/> And looks at Rome as if it were his mirror.<br/></p>
				<p>His head is fashioned of refined gold,<br/> And of pure silver are the arms and breast;<br/> Then he is brass as far down as the fork.<br/></p>
				<p>From that point downward all is chosen iron,<br/> Save that the right foot is of kiln-baked clay,<br/> And more he stands on that than on the other.<br/></p>
				<p>Each part, except the gold, is by a fissure<br/> Asunder cleft, that dripping is with tears,<br/> Which gathered together perforate that cavern.<br/></p>
				<p>From rock to rock they fall into this valley;<br/> Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon they form;<br/> Then downward go along this narrow sluice<br/></p>
				<p>Unto that point where is no more descending.<br/> They form Cocytus; what that pool may be<br/> Thou shalt behold, so here ’tis not narrated.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “If so the present runnel<br/> Doth take its rise in this way from our world,<br/> Why only on this verge appears it to us?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Thou knowest the place is round,<br/> And notwithstanding thou hast journeyed far,<br/> Still to the left descending to the bottom,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hast not yet through all the circle turned.<br/> Therefore if something new appear to us,<br/> It should not bring amazement to thy face.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I again: “Master, where shall be found<br/> Lethe and Phlegethon, for of one thou’rt silent,<br/> And sayest the other of this rain is made?”<br/></p>
				<p>“In all thy questions truly thou dost please me,”<br/> Replied he; “but the boiling of the red<br/> Water might well solve one of them thou makest.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou shalt see Lethe, but outside this moat,<br/> There where the souls repair to lave themselves,<br/> When sin repented of has been removed.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said he: “It is time now to abandon<br/> The wood; take heed that thou come after me;<br/> A way the margins make that are not burning,<br/></p>
				<p>And over them all vapours are extinguished.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Violent against Nature.⁠—Brunetto Latini</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Now bears us onward one of the hard margins,<br/> And so the brooklet’s mist o’ershadows it,<br/> From fire it saves the water and the dikes.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the Flemings, ’twixt Cadsand and Bruges,<br/> Fearing the flood that tow’rds them hurls itself,<br/> Their bulwarks build to put the sea to flight;<br/></p>
				<p>And as the Paduans along the Brenta,<br/> To guard their villas and their villages,<br/> Or ever Chiarentana feel the heat;<br/></p>
				<p>In such similitude had those been made,<br/> Albeit not so lofty nor so thick,<br/> Whoever he might be, the master made them.<br/></p>
				<p>Now were we from the forest so remote,<br/> I could not have discovered where it was,<br/> Even if backward I had turned myself,<br/></p>
				<p>When we a company of souls encountered,<br/> Who came beside the dike, and every one<br/> Gazed at us, as at evening we are wont<br/></p>
				<p>To eye each other under a new moon,<br/> And so towards us sharpened they their brows<br/> As an old tailor at the needle’s eye.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus scrutinised by such a family,<br/> By some one I was recognised, who seized<br/> My garment’s hem, and cried out, “What a marvel!”<br/></p>
				<p>And I, when he stretched forth his arm to me,<br/> On his baked aspect fastened so mine eyes,<br/> That the scorched countenance prevented not<br/></p>
				<p>His recognition by my intellect;<br/> And bowing down my face unto his own,<br/> I made reply, “Are you here, Ser Brunetto?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he: “May’t not displease thee, O my son,<br/> If a brief space with thee Brunetto Latini<br/> Backward return and let the trail go on.”<br/></p>
				<p>I said to him: “With all my power I ask it;<br/> And if you wish me to sit down with you,<br/> I will, if he please, for I go with him.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O son,” he said, “whoever of this herd<br/> A moment stops, lies then a hundred years,<br/> Nor fans himself when smiteth him the fire.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore go on; I at thy skirts will come,<br/> And afterward will I rejoin my band,<br/> Which goes lamenting its eternal doom.”<br/></p>
				<p>I did not dare to go down from the road<br/> Level to walk with him; but my head bowed<br/> I held as one who goeth reverently.<br/></p>
				<p>And he began: “What fortune or what fate<br/> Before the last day leadeth thee down here?<br/> And who is this that showeth thee the way?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Up there above us in the life serene,”<br/> I answered him, “I lost me in a valley,<br/> Or ever yet my age had been completed.<br/></p>
				<p>But yestermorn I turned my back upon it;<br/> This one appeared to me, returning thither,<br/> And homeward leadeth me along this road.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “If thou thy star do follow,<br/> Thou canst not fail thee of a glorious port,<br/> If well I judged in the life beautiful.<br/></p>
				<p>And if I had not died so prematurely,<br/> Seeing Heaven thus benignant unto thee,<br/> I would have given thee comfort in the work.<br/></p>
				<p>But that ungrateful and malignant people,<br/> Which of old time from Fesole descended,<br/> And smacks still of the mountain and the granite,<br/></p>
				<p>Will make itself, for thy good deeds, thy foe;<br/> And it is right; for among crabbed sorbs<br/> It ill befits the sweet fig to bear fruit.<br/></p>
				<p>Old rumour in the world proclaims them blind;<br/> A people avaricious, envious, proud;<br/> Take heed that of their customs thou do cleanse thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Thy fortune so much honour doth reserve thee,<br/> One party and the other shall be hungry<br/> For thee; but far from goat shall be the grass.<br/></p>
				<p>Their litter let the beasts of Fesole<br/> Make of themselves, nor let them touch the plant,<br/> If any still upon their dunghill rise,<br/></p>
				<p>In which may yet revive the consecrated<br/> Seed of those Romans, who remained there when<br/> The nest of such great malice it became.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If my entreaty wholly were fulfilled,”<br/> Replied I to him, “not yet would you be<br/> In banishment from human nature placed;<br/></p>
				<p>For in my mind is fixed, and touches now<br/> My heart the dear and good paternal image<br/> Of you, when in the world from hour to hour<br/></p>
				<p>You taught me how a man becomes eternal;<br/> And how much I am grateful, while I live<br/> Behoves that in my language be discerned.<br/></p>
				<p>What you narrate of my career I write,<br/> And keep it to be glossed with other text<br/> By a Lady who can do it, if I reach her.<br/></p>
				<p>This much will I have manifest to you;<br/> Provided that my conscience do not chide me,<br/> For whatsoever Fortune I am ready.<br/></p>
				<p>Such handsel is not new unto mine ears;<br/> Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel around<br/> As it may please her, and the churl his mattock.”<br/></p>
				<p>My Master thereupon on his right cheek<br/> Did backward turn himself, and looked at me;<br/> Then said: “He listeneth well who noteth it.”<br/></p>
				<p>Nor speaking less on that account, I go<br/> With Ser Brunetto, and I ask who are<br/> His most known and most eminent companions.<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “To know of some is well;<br/> Of others it were laudable to be silent,<br/> For short would be the time for so much speech.<br/></p>
				<p>Know them in sum, that all of them were clerks,<br/> And men of letters great and of great fame,<br/> In the world tainted with the selfsame sin.<br/></p>
				<p>Priscian goes yonder with that wretched crowd,<br/> And Francis of Accorso; and thou hadst seen there<br/> If thou hadst had a hankering for such scurf,<br/></p>
				<p>That one, who by the Servant of the Servants<br/> From Arno was transferred to Bacchiglione,<br/> Where he has left his sin-excited nerves.<br/></p>
				<p>More would I say, but coming and discoursing<br/> Can be no longer; for that I behold<br/> New smoke uprising yonder from the sand.<br/></p>
				<p>A people comes with whom I may not be;<br/> Commended unto thee be my Tesoro,<br/> In which I still live, and no more I ask.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then he turned round, and seemed to be of those<br/> Who at Verona run for the Green Mantle<br/> Across the plain; and seemed to be among them<br/></p>
				<p>The one who wins, and not the one who loses.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-16" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Guidoguerra, Aldobrandi, and Rusticucci.⁠—Cataract of the River of Blood</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Now was I where was heard the reverberation<br/> Of water falling into the next round,<br/> Like to that humming which the beehives make,<br/></p>
				<p>When shadows three together started forth,<br/> Running, from out a company that passed<br/> Beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom.<br/></p>
				<p>Towards us came they, and each one cried out:<br/> “Stop, thou; for by thy garb to us thou seemest<br/> To be some one of our depraved city.”<br/></p>
				<p>Ah me! what wounds I saw upon their limbs,<br/> Recent and ancient by the flames burnt in!<br/> It pains me still but to remember it.<br/></p>
				<p>Unto their cries my Teacher paused attentive;<br/> He turned his face towards me, and “Now wait,”<br/> He said; “to these we should be courteous.<br/></p>
				<p>And if it were not for the fire that darts<br/> The nature of this region, I should say<br/> That haste were more becoming thee than them.”<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as we stood still, they recommenced<br/> The old refrain, and when they overtook us,<br/> Formed of themselves a wheel, all three of them.<br/></p>
				<p>As champions stripped and oiled are wont to do,<br/> Watching for their advantage and their hold,<br/> Before they come to blows and thrusts between them,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus, wheeling round, did every one his visage<br/> Direct to me, so that in opposite wise<br/> His neck and feet continual journey made.<br/></p>
				<p>And, “If the misery of this soft place<br/> Bring in disdain ourselves and our entreaties,”<br/> Began one, “and our aspect black and blistered,<br/></p>
				<p>Let the renown of us thy mind incline<br/> To tell us who thou art, who thus securely<br/> Thy living feet dost move along through Hell.<br/></p>
				<p>He in whose footprints thou dost see me treading,<br/> Naked and skinless though he now may go,<br/> Was of a greater rank than thou dost think;<br/></p>
				<p>He was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;<br/> His name was Guidoguerra, and in life<br/> Much did he with his wisdom and his sword.<br/></p>
				<p>The other, who close by me treads the sand,<br/> Tegghiaio Aldobrandi is, whose fame<br/> Above there in the world should welcome be.<br/></p>
				<p>And I, who with them on the cross am placed,<br/> Jacopo Rusticucci was; and truly<br/> My savage wife, more than aught else, doth harm me.”<br/></p>
				<p>Could I have been protected from the fire,<br/> Below I should have thrown myself among them,<br/> And think the Teacher would have suffered it;<br/></p>
				<p>But as I should have burned and baked myself,<br/> My terror overmastered my good will,<br/> Which made me greedy of embracing them.<br/></p>
				<p>Then I began: “Sorrow and not disdain<br/> Did your condition fix within me so,<br/> That tardily it wholly is stripped off,<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as this my Lord said unto me<br/> Words, on account of which I thought within me<br/> That people such as you are were approaching.<br/></p>
				<p>I of your city am; and evermore<br/> Your labours and your honourable names<br/> I with affection have retraced and heard.<br/></p>
				<p>I leave the gall, and go for the sweet fruits<br/> Promised to me by the veracious Leader;<br/> But to the centre first I needs must plunge.”<br/></p>
				<p>“So may the soul for a long while conduct<br/> Those limbs of thine,” did he make answer then,<br/> “And so may thy renown shine after thee,<br/></p>
				<p>Valour and courtesy, say if they dwell<br/> Within our city, as they used to do,<br/> Or if they wholly have gone out of it;<br/></p>
				<p>For Guglielmo Borsier, who is in torment<br/> With us of late, and goes there with his comrades,<br/> Doth greatly mortify us with his words.”<br/></p>
				<p>“The new inhabitants and the sudden gains,<br/> Pride and extravagance have in thee engendered,<br/> Florence, so that thou weep’st thereat already!”<br/></p>
				<p>In this wise I exclaimed with face uplifted;<br/> And the three, taking that for my reply,<br/> Looked at each other, as one looks at truth.<br/></p>
				<p>“If other times so little it doth cost thee,”<br/> Replied they all, “to satisfy another,<br/> Happy art thou, thus speaking at thy will!<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore, if thou escape from these dark places,<br/> And come to rebehold the beauteous stars,<br/> When it shall pleasure thee to say, ‘I was,’<br/></p>
				<p>See that thou speak of us unto the people.”<br/> Then they broke up the wheel, and in their flight<br/> It seemed as if their agile legs were wings.<br/></p>
				<p>Not an Amen could possibly be said<br/> So rapidly as they had disappeared;<br/> Wherefore the Master deemed best to depart.<br/></p>
				<p>I followed him, and little had we gone,<br/> Before the sound of water was so near us,<br/> That speaking we should hardly have been heard.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as that stream which holdeth its own course<br/> The first from Monte Veso tow’rds the East,<br/> Upon the left-hand slope of Apennine,<br/></p>
				<p>Which is above called Acquacheta, ere<br/> It down descendeth into its low bed,<br/> And at Forli is vacant of that name,<br/></p>
				<p>Reverberates there above San Benedetto<br/> From Alps, by falling at a single leap,<br/> Where for a thousand there were room enough;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus downward from a bank precipitate,<br/> We found resounding that dark-tinted water,<br/> So that it soon the ear would have offended.<br/></p>
				<p>I had a cord around about me girt,<br/> And therewithal I whilom had designed<br/> To take the panther with the painted skin.<br/></p>
				<p>After I this had all from me unloosed,<br/> As my Conductor had commanded me,<br/> I reached it to him, gathered up and coiled,<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat he turned himself to the right side,<br/> And at a little distance from the verge,<br/> He cast it down into that deep abyss.<br/></p>
				<p>“It must needs be some novelty respond,”<br/> I said within myself, “to the new signal<br/> The Master with his eye is following so.”<br/></p>
				<p>Ah me! how very cautious men should be<br/> With those who not alone behold the act,<br/> But with their wisdom look into the thoughts!<br/></p>
				<p>He said to me: “Soon there will upward come<br/> What I await; and what thy thought is dreaming<br/> Must soon reveal itself unto thy sight.”<br/></p>
				<p>Aye to that truth which has the face of falsehood,<br/> A man should close his lips as far as may be,<br/> Because without his fault it causes shame;<br/></p>
				<p>But here I cannot; and, Reader, by the notes<br/> Of this my Comedy to thee I swear,<br/> So may they not be void of lasting favour,<br/></p>
				<p>Athwart that dense and darksome atmosphere<br/> I saw a figure swimming upward come,<br/> Marvellous unto every steadfast heart,<br/></p>
				<p>Even as he returns who goeth down<br/> Sometimes to clear an anchor, which has grappled<br/> Reef, or aught else that in the sea is hidden,<br/></p>
				<p>Who upward stretches, and draws in his feet.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Geryon.⁠—The Violent against Art.⁠—Usurers.⁠—Descent into the Abyss of Malebolge</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“Behold the monster with the pointed tail,<br/> Who cleaves the hills, and breaketh walls and weapons,<br/> Behold him who infecteth all the world.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus unto me my Guide began to say,<br/> And beckoned him that he should come to shore,<br/> Near to the confine of the trodden marble;<br/></p>
				<p>And that uncleanly image of deceit<br/> Came up and thrust ashore its head and bust,<br/> But on the border did not drag its tail.<br/></p>
				<p>The face was as the face of a just man,<br/> Its semblance outwardly was so benign,<br/> And of a serpent all the trunk beside.<br/></p>
				<p>Two paws it had, hairy unto the armpits;<br/> The back, and breast, and both the sides it had<br/> Depicted o’er with nooses and with shields.<br/></p>
				<p>With colours more, groundwork or broidery<br/> Never in cloth did Tartars make nor Turks,<br/> Nor were such tissues by Arachne laid.<br/></p>
				<p>As sometimes wherries lie upon the shore,<br/> That part are in the water, part on land;<br/> And as among the guzzling Germans there,<br/></p>
				<p>The beaver plants himself to wage his war;<br/> So that vile monster lay upon the border,<br/> Which is of stone, and shutteth in the sand.<br/></p>
				<p>His tail was wholly quivering in the void,<br/> Contorting upwards the envenomed fork,<br/> That in the guise of scorpion armed its point.<br/></p>
				<p>The Guide said: “Now perforce must turn aside<br/> Our way a little, even to that beast<br/> Malevolent, that yonder coucheth him.”<br/></p>
				<p>We therefore on the right side descended,<br/> And made ten steps upon the outer verge,<br/> Completely to avoid the sand and flame;<br/></p>
				<p>And after we are come to him, I see<br/> A little farther off upon the sand<br/> A people sitting near the hollow place.<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to me the Master: “So that full<br/> Experience of this round thou bear away,<br/> Now go and see what their condition is.<br/></p>
				<p>There let thy conversation be concise;<br/> Till thou returnest I will speak with him,<br/> That he concede to us his stalwart shoulders.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus farther still upon the outermost<br/> Head of that seventh circle all alone<br/> I went, where sat the melancholy folk.<br/></p>
				<p>Out of their eyes was gushing forth their woe;<br/> This way, that way, they helped them with their hands<br/> Now from the flames and now from the hot soil.<br/></p>
				<p>Not otherwise in summer do the dogs,<br/> Now with the foot, now with the muzzle, when<br/> By fleas, or flies, or gadflies, they are bitten.<br/></p>
				<p>When I had turned mine eyes upon the faces<br/> Of some, on whom the dolorous fire is falling,<br/> Not one of them I knew; but I perceived<br/></p>
				<p>That from the neck of each there hung a pouch,<br/> Which certain colour had, and certain blazon;<br/> And thereupon it seems their eyes are feeding.<br/></p>
				<p>And as I gazing round me come among them,<br/> Upon a yellow pouch I azure saw<br/> That had the face and posture of a lion.<br/></p>
				<p>Proceeding then the current of my sight,<br/> Another of them saw I, red as blood,<br/> Display a goose more white than butter is.<br/></p>
				<p>And one, who with an azure sow and gravid<br/> Emblazoned had his little pouch of white,<br/> Said unto me: “What dost thou in this moat?<br/></p>
				<p>Now get thee gone; and since thou’rt still alive,<br/> Know that a neighbour of mine, Vitaliano,<br/> Will have his seat here on my left-hand side.<br/></p>
				<p>A Paduan am I with these Florentines;<br/> Full many a time they thunder in mine ears,<br/> Exclaiming, ‘Come the sovereign cavalier,<br/></p>
				<p>He who shall bring the satchel with three goats;’ ”<br/> Then twisted he his mouth, and forth he thrust<br/> His tongue, like to an ox that licks its nose.<br/></p>
				<p>And fearing lest my longer stay might vex<br/> Him who had warned me not to tarry long,<br/> Backward I turned me from those weary souls.<br/></p>
				<p>I found my Guide, who had already mounted<br/> Upon the back of that wild animal,<br/> And said to me: “Now be both strong and bold.<br/></p>
				<p>Now we descend by stairways such as these;<br/> Mount thou in front, for I will be midway,<br/> So that the tail may have no power to harm thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>Such as he is who has so near the ague<br/> Of quartan that his nails are blue already,<br/> And trembles all, but looking at the shade;<br/></p>
				<p>Even such became I at those proffered words;<br/> But shame in me his menaces produced,<br/> Which maketh servant strong before good master.<br/></p>
				<p>I seated me upon those monstrous shoulders;<br/> I wished to say, and yet the voice came not<br/> As I believed, “Take heed that thou embrace me.”<br/></p>
				<p>But he, who other times had rescued me<br/> In other peril, soon as I had mounted,<br/> Within his arms encircled and sustained me,<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “Now, Geryon, bestir thyself;<br/> The circles large, and the descent be little;<br/> Think of the novel burden which thou hast.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the little vessel shoves from shore,<br/> Backward, still backward, so he thence withdrew;<br/> And when he wholly felt himself afloat,<br/></p>
				<p>There where his breast had been he turned his tail,<br/> And that extended like an eel he moved,<br/> And with his paws drew to himself the air.<br/></p>
				<p>A greater fear I do not think there was<br/> What time abandoned Phaeton the reins,<br/> Whereby the heavens, as still appears, were scorched;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor when the wretched Icarus his flanks<br/> Felt stripped of feathers by the melting wax,<br/> His father crying, “An ill way thou takest!”<br/></p>
				<p>Than was my own, when I perceived myself<br/> On all sides in the air, and saw extinguished<br/> The sight of everything but of the monster.<br/></p>
				<p>Onward he goeth, swimming slowly, slowly;<br/> Wheels and descends, but I perceive it only<br/> By wind upon my face and from below.<br/></p>
				<p>I heard already on the right the whirlpool<br/> Making a horrible crashing under us;<br/> Whence I thrust out my head with eyes cast downward.<br/></p>
				<p>Then was I still more fearful of the abyss;<br/> Because I fires beheld, and heard laments,<br/> Whereat I, trembling, all the closer cling.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw then, for before I had not seen it,<br/> The turning and descending, by great horrors<br/> That were approaching upon divers sides.<br/></p>
				<p>As falcon who has long been on the wing,<br/> Who, without seeing either lure or bird,<br/> Maketh the falconer say, “Ah me, thou stoopest,”<br/></p>
				<p>Descendeth weary, whence he started swiftly,<br/> Thorough a hundred circles, and alights<br/> Far from his master, sullen and disdainful;<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus did Geryon place us on the bottom,<br/> Close to the bases of the rough-hewn rock,<br/> And being disencumbered of our persons,<br/></p>
				<p>He sped away as arrow from the string.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Eighth Circle: Malebolge.⁠—The Fraudulent.⁠—The First Bolgia: Seducers and Panders.⁠—Venedico Caccianimico.⁠—Jason.⁠—The Second Bolgia: Flatterers.⁠—Allessio Interminelli.⁠—Thaïs</span>
				</h3>
				<p>There is a place in Hell called Malebolge,<br/> Wholly of stone and of an iron colour,<br/> As is the circle that around it turns.<br/></p>
				<p>Right in the middle of the field malign<br/> There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,<br/> Of which its place the structure will recount.<br/></p>
				<p>Round, then, is that enclosure which remains<br/> Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,<br/> And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.<br/></p>
				<p>As where for the protection of the walls<br/> Many and many moats surround the castles,<br/> The part in which they are a figure forms,<br/></p>
				<p>Just such an image those presented there;<br/> And as about such strongholds from their gates<br/> Unto the outer bank are little bridges,<br/></p>
				<p>So from the precipice’s base did crags<br/> Project, which intersected dikes and moats,<br/> Unto the well that truncates and collects them.<br/></p>
				<p>Within this place, down shaken from the back<br/> Of Geryon, we found us; and the Poet<br/> Held to the left, and I moved on behind.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon my right hand I beheld new anguish,<br/> New torments, and new wielders of the lash,<br/> Wherewith the foremost Bolgia was replete.<br/></p>
				<p>Down at the bottom were the sinners naked;<br/> This side the middle came they facing us,<br/> Beyond it, with us, but with greater steps;<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the Romans, for the mighty host,<br/> The year of Jubilee, upon the bridge,<br/> Have chosen a mode to pass the people over;<br/></p>
				<p>For all upon one side towards the Castle<br/> Their faces have, and go unto <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s;<br/> On the other side they go towards the Mountain.<br/></p>
				<p>This side and that, along the livid stone<br/> Beheld I horned demons with great scourges,<br/> Who cruelly were beating them behind.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah me! how they did make them lift their legs<br/> At the first blows! and sooth not any one<br/> The second waited for, nor for the third.<br/></p>
				<p>While I was going on, mine eyes by one<br/> Encountered were; and straight I said: “Already<br/> With sight of this one I am not unfed.”<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore I stayed my feet to make him out,<br/> And with me the sweet Guide came to a stand,<br/> And to my going somewhat back assented;<br/></p>
				<p>And he, the scourged one, thought to hide himself,<br/> Lowering his face, but little it availed him;<br/> For said I: “Thou that castest down thine eyes,<br/></p>
				<p>If false are not the features which thou bearest,<br/> Thou art Venedico Caccianimico;<br/> But what doth bring thee to such pungent sauces?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Unwillingly I tell it;<br/> But forces me thine utterance distinct,<br/> Which makes me recollect the ancient world.<br/></p>
				<p>I was the one who the fair Ghisola<br/> Induced to grant the wishes of the Marquis,<br/> Howe’er the shameless story may be told.<br/></p>
				<p>Not the sole Bolognese am I who weeps here;<br/> Nay, rather is this place so full of them,<br/> That not so many tongues to-day are taught<br/></p>
				<p>’Twixt Reno and Savena to say ‘sipa;’<br/> And if thereof thou wishest pledge or proof,<br/> Bring to thy mind our avaricious heart.”<br/></p>
				<p>While speaking in this manner, with his scourge<br/> A demon smote him, and said: “Get thee gone<br/> Pander, there are no women here for coin.”<br/></p>
				<p>I joined myself again unto mine Escort;<br/> Thereafterward with footsteps few we came<br/> To where a crag projected from the bank.<br/></p>
				<p>This very easily did we ascend,<br/> And turning to the right along its ridge,<br/> From those eternal circles we departed.<br/></p>
				<p>When we were there, where it is hollowed out<br/> Beneath, to give a passage to the scourged,<br/> The Guide said: “Wait, and see that on thee strike<br/></p>
				<p>The vision of those others evil-born,<br/> Of whom thou hast not yet beheld the faces,<br/> Because together with us they have gone.”<br/></p>
				<p>From the old bridge we looked upon the train<br/> Which tow’rds us came upon the other border,<br/> And which the scourges in like manner smite.<br/></p>
				<p>And the good Master, without my inquiring,<br/> Said to me: “See that tall one who is coming,<br/> And for his pain seems not to shed a tear;<br/></p>
				<p>Still what a royal aspect he retains!<br/> That Jason is, who by his heart and cunning<br/> The Colchians of the Ram made destitute.<br/></p>
				<p>He by the isle of Lemnos passed along<br/> After the daring women pitiless<br/> Had unto death devoted all their males.<br/></p>
				<p>There with his tokens and with ornate words<br/> Did he deceive Hypsipyle, the maiden<br/> Who first, herself, had all the rest deceived.<br/></p>
				<p>There did he leave her pregnant and forlorn;<br/> Such sin unto such punishment condemns him,<br/> And also for Medea is vengeance done.<br/></p>
				<p>With him go those who in such wise deceive;<br/> And this sufficient be of the first valley<br/> To know, and those that in its jaws it holds.”<br/></p>
				<p>We were already where the narrow path<br/> Crosses athwart the second dike, and forms<br/> Of that a buttress for another arch.<br/></p>
				<p>Thence we heard people, who are making moan<br/> In the next Bolgia, snorting with their muzzles,<br/> And with their palms beating upon themselves<br/></p>
				<p>The margins were incrusted with a mould<br/> By exhalation from below, that sticks there,<br/> And with the eyes and nostrils wages war.<br/></p>
				<p>The bottom is so deep, no place suffices<br/> To give us sight of it, without ascending<br/> The arch’s back, where most the crag impends.<br/></p>
				<p>Thither we came, and thence down in the moat<br/> I saw a people smothered in a filth<br/> That out of human privies seemed to flow;<br/></p>
				<p>And whilst below there with mine eye I search,<br/> I saw one with his head so foul with ordure,<br/> It was not clear if he were clerk or layman.<br/></p>
				<p>He screamed to me: “Wherefore art thou so eager<br/> To look at me more than the other foul ones?”<br/> And I to him: “Because, if I remember,<br/></p>
				<p>I have already seen thee with dry hair,<br/> And thou’rt Alessio Interminei of Lucca;<br/> Therefore I eye thee more than all the others.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he thereon, belabouring his pumpkin:<br/> “The flatteries have submerged me here below,<br/> Wherewith my tongue was never surfeited.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to me the Guide: “See that thou thrust<br/> Thy visage somewhat farther in advance,<br/> That with thine eyes thou well the face attain<br/></p>
				<p>Of that uncleanly and dishevelled drab,<br/> Who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails,<br/> And crouches now, and now on foot is standing.<br/></p>
				<p>Thais the harlot is it, who replied<br/> Unto her paramour, when he said, ‘Have I<br/> Great gratitude from thee?’⁠—‘Nay, marvellous;’<br/></p>
				<p>And herewith let our sight be satisfied.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Third Bolgia: the Simoniacs.⁠—Pope Nicholas <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></span>
				</h3>
				<p>O Simon Magus, O forlorn disciples,<br/> Ye who the things of God, which ought to be<br/> The brides of holiness, rapaciously<br/></p>
				<p>For silver and for gold do prostitute,<br/> Now it behoves for you the trumpet sound,<br/> Because in this third Bolgia ye abide.<br/></p>
				<p>We had already on the following tomb<br/> Ascended to that portion of the crag<br/> Which o’er the middle of the moat hangs plumb.<br/></p>
				<p>Wisdom supreme, O how great art thou showest<br/> In heaven, in earth, and in the evil world,<br/> And with what justice doth thy power distribute!<br/></p>
				<p>I saw upon the sides and on the bottom<br/> The livid stone with perforations filled,<br/> All of one size, and every one was round.<br/></p>
				<p>To me less ample seemed they not, nor greater<br/> Than those that in my beautiful Saint John<br/> Are fashioned for the place of the baptisers,<br/></p>
				<p>And one of which, not many years ago,<br/> I broke for some one, who was drowning in it;<br/> Be this a seal all men to undeceive.<br/></p>
				<p>Out of the mouth of each one there protruded<br/> The feet of a transgressor, and the legs<br/> Up to the calf, the rest within remained.<br/></p>
				<p>In all of them the soles were both on fire;<br/> Wherefore the joints so violently quivered,<br/> They would have snapped asunder withes and bands.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the flame of unctuous things is wont<br/> To move upon the outer surface only,<br/> So likewise was it there from heel to point.<br/></p>
				<p>“Master, who is that one who writhes himself,<br/> More than his other comrades quivering,”<br/> I said, “and whom a redder flame is sucking?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “If thou wilt have me bear thee<br/> Down there along that bank which lowest lies,<br/> From him thou’lt know his errors and himself.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “What pleases thee, to me is pleasing;<br/> Thou art my Lord, and knowest that I depart not<br/> From thy desire, and knowest what is not spoken.”<br/></p>
				<p>Straightway upon the fourth dike we arrived;<br/> We turned, and on the left-hand side descended<br/> Down to the bottom full of holes and narrow.<br/></p>
				<p>And the good Master yet from off his haunch<br/> Deposed me not, till to the hole he brought me<br/> Of him who so lamented with his shanks.<br/></p>
				<p>“Whoe’er thou art, that standest upside down,<br/> O doleful soul, implanted like a stake,”<br/> To say began I, “if thou canst, speak out.”<br/></p>
				<p>I stood even as the friar who is confessing<br/> The false assassin, who, when he is fixed,<br/> Recalls him, so that death may be delayed.<br/></p>
				<p>And he cried out: “Dost thou stand there already,<br/> Dost thou stand there already, Boniface?<br/> By many years the record lied to me.<br/></p>
				<p>Art thou so early satiate with that wealth,<br/> For which thou didst not fear to take by fraud<br/> The beautiful Lady, and then work her woe?”<br/></p>
				<p>Such I became, as people are who stand,<br/> Not comprehending what is answered them,<br/> As if bemocked, and know not how to answer.<br/></p>
				<p>Then said Virgilius: “Say to him straightway,<br/> ‘I am not he, I am not he thou thinkest.’ ”<br/> And I replied as was imposed on me.<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat the spirit writhed with both his feet,<br/> Then, sighing, with a voice of lamentation<br/> Said to me: “Then what wantest thou of me?<br/></p>
				<p>If who I am thou carest so much to know,<br/> That thou on that account hast crossed the bank,<br/> Know that I vested was with the great mantle;<br/></p>
				<p>And truly was I son of the She-bear,<br/> So eager to advance the cubs, that wealth<br/> Above, and here myself, I pocketed.<br/></p>
				<p>Beneath my head the others are dragged down<br/> Who have preceded me in simony,<br/> Flattened along the fissure of the rock.<br/></p>
				<p>Below there I shall likewise fall, whenever<br/> That one shall come who I believed thou wast,<br/> What time the sudden question I proposed.<br/></p>
				<p>But longer I my feet already toast,<br/> And here have been in this way upside down,<br/> Than he will planted stay with reddened feet;<br/></p>
				<p>For after him shall come of fouler deed<br/> From tow’rds the west a Pastor without law,<br/> Such as befits to cover him and me.<br/></p>
				<p>New Jason will he be, of whom we read<br/> In Maccabees; and as his king was pliant,<br/> So he who governs France shall be to this one.”<br/></p>
				<p>I do not know if I were here too bold,<br/> That him I answered only in this metre:<br/> “I pray thee tell me now how great a treasure<br/></p>
				<p>Our Lord demanded of Saint Peter first,<br/> Before he put the keys into his keeping?<br/> Truly he nothing asked but ‘Follow me.’<br/></p>
				<p>Nor Peter nor the rest asked of Matthias<br/> Silver or gold, when he by lot was chosen<br/> Unto the place the guilty soul had lost.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore stay here, for thou art justly punished,<br/> And keep safe guard o’er the ill-gotten money,<br/> Which caused thee to be valiant against Charles.<br/></p>
				<p>And were it not that still forbids it me<br/> The reverence for the keys superlative<br/> Thou hadst in keeping in the gladsome life,<br/></p>
				<p>I would make use of words more grievous still;<br/> Because your avarice afflicts the world,<br/> Trampling the good and lifting the depraved.<br/></p>
				<p>The Evangelist you Pastors had in mind,<br/> When she who sitteth upon many waters<br/> To fornicate with kings by him was seen;<br/></p>
				<p>The same who with the seven heads was born,<br/> And power and strength from the ten horns received,<br/> So long as virtue to her spouse was pleasing.<br/></p>
				<p>Ye have made yourselves a god of gold and silver;<br/> And from the idolater how differ ye,<br/> Save that he one, and ye a hundred worship?<br/></p>
				<p>Ah, Constantine! of how much ill was mother,<br/> Not thy conversion, but that marriage dower<br/> Which the first wealthy Father took from thee!”<br/></p>
				<p>And while I sang to him such notes as these,<br/> Either that anger or that conscience stung him,<br/> He struggled violently with both his feet.<br/></p>
				<p>I think in sooth that it my Leader pleased,<br/> With such contented lip he listened ever<br/> Unto the sound of the true words expressed.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore with both his arms he took me up,<br/> And when he had me all upon his breast,<br/> Remounted by the way where he descended.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor did he tire to have me clasped to him;<br/> But bore me to the summit of the arch<br/> Which from the fourth dike to the fifth is passage.<br/></p>
				<p>There tenderly he laid his burden down,<br/> Tenderly on the crag uneven and steep,<br/> That would have been hard passage for the goats:<br/></p>
				<p>Thence was unveiled to me another valley.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fourth Bolgia: Soothsayers.⁠—Amphiaraüs, Tiresias, Aruns, Manto, Eryphylus, Michael Scott, Guido Bonatti, and Asdente</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Of a new pain behoves me to make verses<br/> And give material to the twentieth canto<br/> Of the first song, which is of the submerged.<br/></p>
				<p>I was already thoroughly disposed<br/> To peer down into the uncovered depth,<br/> Which bathed itself with tears of agony;<br/></p>
				<p>And people saw I through the circular valley,<br/> Silent and weeping, coming at the pace<br/> Which in this world the Litanies assume.<br/></p>
				<p>As lower down my sight descended on them,<br/> Wondrously each one seemed to be distorted<br/> From chin to the beginning of the chest;<br/></p>
				<p>For tow’rds the reins the countenance was turned,<br/> And backward it behoved them to advance,<br/> As to look forward had been taken from them.<br/></p>
				<p>Perchance indeed by violence of palsy<br/> Some one has been thus wholly turned awry;<br/> But I ne’er saw it, nor believe it can be.<br/></p>
				<p>As God may let thee, Reader, gather fruit<br/> From this thy reading, think now for thyself<br/> How I could ever keep my face unmoistened,<br/></p>
				<p>When our own image near me I beheld<br/> Distorted so, the weeping of the eyes<br/> Along the fissure bathed the hinder parts.<br/></p>
				<p>Truly I wept, leaning upon a peak<br/> Of the hard crag, so that my Escort said<br/> To me: “Art thou, too, of the other fools?<br/></p>
				<p>Here pity lives when it is wholly dead;<br/> Who is a greater reprobate than he<br/> Who feels compassion at the doom divine?<br/></p>
				<p>Lift up, lift up thy head, and see for whom<br/> Opened the earth before the Thebans’ eyes;<br/> Wherefore they all cried: ‘Whither rushest thou,<br/></p>
				<p>Amphiaraus? Why dost leave the war?’<br/> And downward ceased he not to fall amain<br/> As far as Minos, who lays hold on all.<br/></p>
				<p>See, he has made a bosom of his shoulders!<br/> Because he wished to see too far before him<br/> Behind he looks, and backward goes his way:<br/></p>
				<p>Behold Tiresias, who his semblance changed,<br/> When from a male a female he became,<br/> His members being all of them transformed;<br/></p>
				<p>And afterwards was forced to strike once more<br/> The two entangled serpents with his rod,<br/> Ere he could have again his manly plumes.<br/></p>
				<p>That Aruns is, who backs the other’s belly,<br/> Who in the hills of Luni, there where grubs<br/> The Carrarese who houses underneath,<br/></p>
				<p>Among the marbles white a cavern had<br/> For his abode; whence to behold the stars<br/> And sea, the view was not cut off from him.<br/></p>
				<p>And she there, who is covering up her breasts,<br/> Which thou beholdest not, with loosened tresses,<br/> And on that side has all the hairy skin,<br/></p>
				<p>Was Manto, who made quest through many lands,<br/> Afterwards tarried there where I was born;<br/> Whereof I would thou list to me a little.<br/></p>
				<p>After her father had from life departed,<br/> And the city of Bacchus had become enslaved,<br/> She a long season wandered through the world.<br/></p>
				<p>Above in beauteous Italy lies a lake<br/> At the Alp’s foot that shuts in Germany<br/> Over Tyrol, and has the name Benaco.<br/></p>
				<p>By a thousand springs, I think, and more, is bathed,<br/> ’Twixt Garda and Val Camonica, Pennino,<br/> With water that grows stagnant in that lake.<br/></p>
				<p>Midway a place is where the Trentine Pastor,<br/> And he of Brescia, and the Veronese<br/> Might give his blessing, if he passed that way.<br/></p>
				<p>Sitteth Peschiera, fortress fair and strong,<br/> To front the Brescians and the Bergamasks,<br/> Where round about the bank descendeth lowest.<br/></p>
				<p>There of necessity must fall whatever<br/> In bosom of Benaco cannot stay,<br/> And grows a river down through verdant pastures.<br/></p>
				<p>Soon as the water doth begin to run,<br/> No more Benaco is it called, but Mincio,<br/> Far as Governo, where it falls in Po.<br/></p>
				<p>Not far it runs before it finds a plain<br/> In which it spreads itself, and makes it marshy,<br/> And oft ’tis wont in summer to be sickly.<br/></p>
				<p>Passing that way the virgin pitiless<br/> Land in the middle of the fen descried,<br/> Untilled and naked of inhabitants;<br/></p>
				<p>There to escape all human intercourse,<br/> She with her servants stayed, her arts to practise<br/> And lived, and left her empty body there.<br/></p>
				<p>The men, thereafter, who were scattered round,<br/> Collected in that place, which was made strong<br/> By the lagoon it had on every side;<br/></p>
				<p>They built their city over those dead bones,<br/> And, after her who first the place selected,<br/> Mantua named it, without other omen.<br/></p>
				<p>Its people once within more crowded were,<br/> Ere the stupidity of Casalodi<br/> From Pinamonte had received deceit.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore I caution thee, if e’er thou hearest<br/> Originate my city otherwise,<br/> No falsehood may the verity defraud.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “My Master, thy discourses are<br/> To me so certain, and so take my faith,<br/> That unto me the rest would be spent coals.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me of the people who are passing,<br/> If any one note-worthy thou beholdest,<br/> For only unto that my mind reverts.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said he to me: “He who from the cheek<br/> Thrusts out his beard upon his swarthy shoulders<br/> Was, at the time when Greece was void of males,<br/></p>
				<p>So that there scarce remained one in the cradle,<br/> An augur, and with Calchas gave the moment,<br/> In Aulis, when to sever the first cable.<br/></p>
				<p>Eryphylus his name was, and so sings<br/> My lofty Tragedy in some part or other;<br/> That knowest thou well, who knowest the whole of it.<br/></p>
				<p>The next, who is so slender in the flanks,<br/> Was Michael Scott, who of a verity<br/> Of magical illusions knew the game.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold Guido Bonatti, behold Asdente,<br/> Who now unto his leather and his thread<br/> Would fain have stuck, but he too late repents.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold the wretched ones, who left the needle,<br/> The spool and rock, and made them fortune-tellers;<br/> They wrought their magic spells with herb and image.<br/></p>
				<p>But come now, for already holds the confines<br/> Of both the hemispheres, and under Seville<br/> Touches the ocean-wave, Cain and the thorns,<br/></p>
				<p>And yesternight the moon was round already;<br/> Thou shouldst remember well it did not harm thee<br/> From time to time within the forest deep.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus spake he to me, and we walked the while.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fifth Bolgia: Peculators.⁠—The Elder of Santa Zita.⁠—Malebranche</span>
				</h3>
				<p>From bridge to bridge thus, speaking other things<br/> Of which my Comedy cares not to sing,<br/> We came along, and held the summit, when<br/></p>
				<p>We halted to behold another fissure<br/> Of Malebolge and other vain laments;<br/> And I beheld it marvellously dark.<br/></p>
				<p>As in the Arsenal of the Venetians<br/> Boils in the winter the tenacious pitch<br/> To smear their unsound vessels o’er again,<br/></p>
				<p>For sail they cannot; and instead thereof<br/> One makes his vessel new, and one recaulks<br/> The ribs of that which many a voyage has made;<br/></p>
				<p>One hammers at the prow, one at the stern,<br/> This one makes oars, and that one cordage twists,<br/> Another mends the mainsail and the mizzen;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus, not by fire, but by the art divine,<br/> Was boiling down below there a dense pitch<br/> Which upon every side the bank belimed.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw it, but I did not see within it<br/> Aught but the bubbles that the boiling raised,<br/> And all swell up and resubside compressed.<br/></p>
				<p>The while below there fixedly I gazed,<br/> My Leader, crying out: “Beware, beware!”<br/> Drew me unto himself from where I stood.<br/></p>
				<p>Then I turned round, as one who is impatient<br/> To see what it behoves him to escape,<br/> And whom a sudden terror doth unman,<br/></p>
				<p>Who, while he looks, delays not his departure;<br/> And I beheld behind us a black devil,<br/> Running along upon the crag, approach.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah, how ferocious was he in his aspect!<br/> And how he seemed to me in action ruthless,<br/> With open wings and light upon his feet!<br/></p>
				<p>His shoulders, which sharp-pointed were and high,<br/> A sinner did encumber with both haunches,<br/> And he held clutched the sinews of the feet.<br/></p>
				<p>From off our bridge, he said: “O Malebranche,<br/> Behold one of the elders of Saint Zita;<br/> Plunge him beneath, for I return for others<br/></p>
				<p>Unto that town, which is well furnished with them.<br/> All there are barrators, except Bonturo;<br/> No into Yes for money there is changed.”<br/></p>
				<p>He hurled him down, and over the hard crag<br/> Turned round, and never was a mastiff loosened<br/> In so much hurry to pursue a thief.<br/></p>
				<p>The other sank, and rose again face downward;<br/> But the demons, under cover of the bridge,<br/> Cried: “Here the Santo Volto has no place!<br/></p>
				<p>Here swims one otherwise than in the Serchio;<br/> Therefore, if for our gaffs thou wishest not,<br/> Do not uplift thyself above the pitch.”<br/></p>
				<p>They seized him then with more than a hundred rakes;<br/> They said: “It here behoves thee to dance covered,<br/> That, if thou canst, thou secretly mayest pilfer.”<br/></p>
				<p>Not otherwise the cooks their scullions make<br/> Immerse into the middle of the caldron<br/> The meat with hooks, so that it may not float.<br/></p>
				<p>Said the good Master to me: “That it be not<br/> Apparent thou art here, crouch thyself down<br/> Behind a jag, that thou mayest have some screen;<br/></p>
				<p>And for no outrage that is done to me<br/> Be thou afraid, because these things I know,<br/> For once before was I in such a scuffle.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then he passed on beyond the bridge’s head,<br/> And as upon the sixth bank he arrived,<br/> Need was for him to have a steadfast front.<br/></p>
				<p>With the same fury, and the same uproar,<br/> As dogs leap out upon a mendicant,<br/> Who on a sudden begs, where’er he stops,<br/></p>
				<p>They issued from beneath the little bridge,<br/> And turned against him all their grappling-irons;<br/> But he cried out: “Be none of you malignant!<br/></p>
				<p>Before those hooks of yours lay hold of me,<br/> Let one of you step forward, who may hear me,<br/> And then take counsel as to grappling me.”<br/></p>
				<p>They all cried out: “Let Malacoda go;”<br/> Whereat one started, and the rest stood still,<br/> And he came to him, saying: “What avails it?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Thinkest thou, Malacoda, to behold me<br/> Advanced into this place,” my Master said,<br/> “Safe hitherto from all your skill of fence,<br/></p>
				<p>Without the will divine, and fate auspicious?<br/> Let me go on, for it in Heaven is willed<br/> That I another show this savage road.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then was his arrogance so humbled in him,<br/> That he let fall his grapnel at his feet,<br/> And to the others said: “Now strike him not.”<br/></p>
				<p>And unto me my Guide: “O thou, who sittest<br/> Among the splinters of the bridge crouched down,<br/> Securely now return to me again.”<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore I started and came swiftly to him;<br/> And all the devils forward thrust themselves,<br/> So that I feared they would not keep their compact.<br/></p>
				<p>And thus beheld I once afraid the soldiers<br/> Who issued under safeguard from Caprona,<br/> Seeing themselves among so many foes.<br/></p>
				<p>Close did I press myself with all my person<br/> Beside my Leader, and turned not mine eyes<br/> From off their countenance, which was not good.<br/></p>
				<p>They lowered their rakes, and “Wilt thou have me hit him,”<br/> They said to one another, “on the rump?”<br/> And answered: “Yes; see that thou nick him with it.”<br/></p>
				<p>But the same demon who was holding parley<br/> With my Conductor turned him very quickly,<br/> And said: “Be quiet, be quiet, Scarmiglione;”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to us: “You can no farther go<br/> Forward upon this crag, because is lying<br/> All shattered, at the bottom, the sixth arch.<br/></p>
				<p>And if it still doth please you to go onward,<br/> Pursue your way along upon this rock;<br/> Near is another crag that yields a path.<br/></p>
				<p>Yesterday, five hours later than this hour,<br/> One thousand and two hundred sixty-six<br/> Years were complete, that here the way was broken.<br/></p>
				<p>I send in that direction some of mine<br/> To see if any one doth air himself;<br/> Go ye with them; for they will not be vicious.<br/></p>
				<p>Step forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,”<br/> Began he to cry out, “and thou, Cagnazzo;<br/> And Barbariccia, do thou guide the ten.<br/></p>
				<p>Come forward, Libicocco and Draghignazzo,<br/> And tusked Ciriatto and Graffiacane,<br/> And Farfarello and mad Rubicante;<br/></p>
				<p>Search ye all round about the boiling pitch;<br/> Let these be safe as far as the next crag,<br/> That all unbroken passes o’er the dens.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O me! what is it, Master, that I see?<br/> Pray let us go,” I said, “without an escort,<br/> If thou knowest how, since for myself I ask none.<br/></p>
				<p>If thou art as observant as thy wont is,<br/> Dost thou not see that they do gnash their teeth,<br/> And with their brows are threatening woe to us?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “I will not have thee fear;<br/> Let them gnash on, according to their fancy,<br/> Because they do it for those boiling wretches.”<br/></p>
				<p>Along the left-hand dike they wheeled about;<br/> But first had each one thrust his tongue between<br/> His teeth towards their leader for a signal;<br/></p>
				<p>And he had made a trumpet of his rump.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Ciampolo, Friar Gomita, and Michael Zanche</span>
				</h3>
				<p>I have erewhile seen horsemen moving camp,<br/> Begin the storming, and their muster make,<br/> And sometimes starting off for their escape;<br/></p>
				<p>Vaunt-couriers have I seen upon your land,<br/> O Aretines, and foragers go forth,<br/> Tournaments stricken, and the joustings run,<br/></p>
				<p>Sometimes with trumpets and sometimes with bells,<br/> With kettle-drums, and signals of the castles,<br/> And with our own, and with outlandish things,<br/></p>
				<p>But never yet with bagpipe so uncouth<br/> Did I see horsemen move, nor infantry,<br/> Nor ship by any sign of land or star.<br/></p>
				<p>We went upon our way with the ten demons;<br/> Ah, savage company! but in the church<br/> With saints, and in the tavern with the gluttons!<br/></p>
				<p>Ever upon the pitch was my intent,<br/> To see the whole condition of that Bolgia,<br/> And of the people who therein were burned.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the dolphins, when they make a sign<br/> To mariners by arching of the back,<br/> That they should counsel take to save their vessel,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus sometimes, to alleviate his pain,<br/> One of the sinners would display his back,<br/> And in less time conceal it than it lightens.<br/></p>
				<p>As on the brink of water in a ditch<br/> The frogs stand only with their muzzles out,<br/> So that they hide their feet and other bulk,<br/></p>
				<p>So upon every side the sinners stood;<br/> But ever as Barbariccia near them came,<br/> Thus underneath the boiling they withdrew.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw, and still my heart doth shudder at it,<br/> One waiting thus, even as it comes to pass<br/> One frog remains, and down another dives;<br/></p>
				<p>And Graffiacan, who most confronted him,<br/> Grappled him by his tresses smeared with pitch,<br/> And drew him up, so that he seemed an otter.<br/></p>
				<p>I knew, before, the names of all of them,<br/> So had I noted them when they were chosen,<br/> And when they called each other, listened how.<br/></p>
				<p>“O Rubicante, see that thou do lay<br/> Thy claws upon him, so that thou mayst flay him,”<br/> Cried all together the accursed ones.<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “My Master, see to it, if thou canst,<br/> That thou mayst know who is the luckless wight,<br/> Thus come into his adversaries’ hands.”<br/></p>
				<p>Near to the side of him my Leader drew,<br/> Asked of him whence he was; and he replied:<br/> “I in the kingdom of Navarre was born;<br/></p>
				<p>My mother placed me servant to a lord,<br/> For she had borne me to a ribald knave,<br/> Destroyer of himself and of his things.<br/></p>
				<p>Then I domestic was of good King Thibault;<br/> I set me there to practise barratry,<br/> For which I pay the reckoning in this heat.”<br/></p>
				<p>And Ciriatto, from whose mouth projected,<br/> On either side, a tusk, as in a boar,<br/> Caused him to feel how one of them could rip.<br/></p>
				<p>Among malicious cats the mouse had come;<br/> But Barbariccia clasped him in his arms,<br/> And said: “Stand ye aside, while I enfork him.”<br/></p>
				<p>And to my Master he turned round his head;<br/> “Ask him again,” he said, “if more thou wish<br/> To know from him, before some one destroy him.”<br/></p>
				<p>The Guide: “Now tell then of the other culprits;<br/> Knowest thou any one who is a Latian,<br/> Under the pitch?” And he: “I separated<br/></p>
				<p>Lately from one who was a neighbour to it;<br/> Would that I still were covered up with him,<br/> For I should fear not either claw nor hook!”<br/></p>
				<p>And Libicocco: “We have borne too much;”<br/> And with his grapnel seized him by the arm,<br/> So that, by rending, he tore off a tendon.<br/></p>
				<p>Eke Draghignazzo wished to pounce upon him<br/> Down at the legs; whence their Decurion<br/> Turned round and round about with evil look.<br/></p>
				<p>When they again somewhat were pacified,<br/> Of him, who still was looking at his wound,<br/> Demanded my Conductor without stay:<br/></p>
				<p>“Who was that one, from whom a luckless parting<br/> Thou sayest thou hast made, to come ashore?”<br/> And he replied: “It was the Friar Gomita,<br/></p>
				<p>He of Gallura, vessel of all fraud,<br/> Who had the enemies of his Lord in hand,<br/> And dealt so with them each exults thereat;<br/></p>
				<p>Money he took, and let them smoothly off,<br/> As he says; and in other offices<br/> A barrator was he, not mean but sovereign.<br/></p>
				<p>Foregathers with him one Don Michael Zanche<br/> Of Logodoro; and of Sardinia<br/> To gossip never do their tongues feel tired.<br/></p>
				<p>O me! see that one, how he grinds his teeth;<br/> Still farther would I speak, but am afraid<br/> Lest he to scratch my itch be making ready.”<br/></p>
				<p>And the grand Provost, turned to Farfarello,<br/> Who rolled his eyes about as if to strike,<br/> Said: “Stand aside there, thou malicious bird.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If you desire either to see or hear,”<br/> The terror-stricken recommenced thereon,<br/> “Tuscans or Lombards, I will make them come.<br/></p>
				<p>But let the Malebranche cease a little,<br/> So that these may not their revenges fear,<br/> And I, down sitting in this very place,<br/></p>
				<p>For one that I am will make seven come,<br/> When I shall whistle, as our custom is<br/> To do whenever one of us comes out.”<br/></p>
				<p>Cagnazzo at these words his muzzle lifted,<br/> Shaking his head, and said: “Just hear the trick<br/> Which he has thought of, down to throw himself!”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he, who snares in great abundance had,<br/> Responded: “I by far too cunning am,<br/> When I procure for mine a greater sadness.”<br/></p>
				<p>Alichin held not in, but running counter<br/> Unto the rest, said to him: “If thou dive,<br/> I will not follow thee upon the gallop,<br/></p>
				<p>But I will beat my wings above the pitch;<br/> The height be left, and be the bank a shield<br/> To see if thou alone dost countervail us.”<br/></p>
				<p>O thou who readest, thou shalt hear new sport!<br/> Each to the other side his eyes averted;<br/> He first, who most reluctant was to do it.<br/></p>
				<p>The Navarrese selected well his time;<br/> Planted his feet on land, and in a moment<br/> Leaped, and released himself from their design.<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat each one was suddenly stung with shame,<br/> But he most who was cause of the defeat;<br/> Therefore he moved, and cried: “Thou art o’ertakern.”<br/></p>
				<p>But little it availed, for wings could not<br/> Outstrip the fear; the other one went under,<br/> And, flying, upward he his breast directed;<br/></p>
				<p>Not otherwise the duck upon a sudden<br/> Dives under, when the falcon is approaching,<br/> And upward he returneth cross and weary.<br/></p>
				<p>Infuriate at the mockery, Calcabrina<br/> Flying behind him followed close, desirous<br/> The other should escape, to have a quarrel.<br/></p>
				<p>And when the barrator had disappeared,<br/> He turned his talons upon his companion,<br/> And grappled with him right above the moat.<br/></p>
				<p>But sooth the other was a doughty sparhawk<br/> To clapperclaw him well; and both of them<br/> Fell in the middle of the boiling pond.<br/></p>
				<p>A sudden intercessor was the heat;<br/> But ne’ertheless of rising there was naught,<br/> To such degree they had their wings belimed.<br/></p>
				<p>Lamenting with the others, Barbariccia<br/> Made four of them fly to the other side<br/> With all their gaffs, and very speedily<br/></p>
				<p>This side and that they to their posts descended;<br/> They stretched their hooks towards the pitch-ensnared,<br/> Who were already baked within the crust,<br/></p>
				<p>And in this manner busied did we leave them.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Sixth Bolgia: Hypocrites.⁠—Catalano and Loderingo.⁠—Caiaphas</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Silent, alone, and without company<br/> We went, the one in front, the other after,<br/> As go the Minor Friars along their way.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon the fable of Aesop was directed<br/> My thought, by reason of the present quarrel,<br/> Where he has spoken of the frog and mouse;<br/></p>
				<p>For ‘mo’ and ‘issa’ are not more alike<br/> Than this one is to that, if well we couple<br/> End and beginning with a steadfast mind.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as one thought from another springs,<br/> So afterward from that was born another,<br/> Which the first fear within me double made.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did I ponder: “These on our account<br/> Are laughed to scorn, with injury and scoff<br/> So great, that much I think it must annoy them.<br/></p>
				<p>If anger be engrafted on ill-will,<br/> They will come after us more merciless<br/> Than dog upon the leveret which he seizes,”<br/></p>
				<p>I felt my hair stand all on end already<br/> With terror, and stood backwardly intent,<br/> When said I: “Master, if thou hidest not<br/></p>
				<p>Thyself and me forthwith, of Malebranche<br/> I am in dread; we have them now behind us;<br/> I so imagine them, I already feel them.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he: “If I were made of leaded glass,<br/> Thine outward image I should not attract<br/> Sooner to me than I imprint the inner.<br/></p>
				<p>Just now thy thoughts came in among my own,<br/> With similar attitude and similar face,<br/> So that of both one counsel sole I made.<br/></p>
				<p>If peradventure the right bank so slope<br/> That we to the next Bolgia can descend,<br/> We shall escape from the imagined chase.”<br/></p>
				<p>Not yet he finished rendering such opinion,<br/> When I beheld them come with outstretched wings,<br/> Not far remote, with will to seize upon us.<br/></p>
				<p>My Leader on a sudden seized me up,<br/> Even as a mother who by noise is wakened,<br/> And close beside her sees the enkindled flames,<br/></p>
				<p>Who takes her son, and flies, and does not stop,<br/> Having more care of him than of herself,<br/> So that she clothes her only with a shift;<br/></p>
				<p>And downward from the top of the hard bank<br/> Supine he gave him to the pendent rock,<br/> That one side of the other Bolgia walls.<br/></p>
				<p>Ne’er ran so swiftly water through a sluice<br/> To turn the wheel of any land-built mill,<br/> When nearest to the paddles it approaches,<br/></p>
				<p>As did my Master down along that border,<br/> Bearing me with him on his breast away,<br/> As his own son, and not as a companion.<br/></p>
				<p>Hardly the bed of the ravine below<br/> His feet had reached, ere they had reached the hill<br/> Right over us; but he was not afraid;<br/></p>
				<p>For the high Providence, which had ordained<br/> To place them ministers of the fifth moat,<br/> The power of thence departing took from all.<br/></p>
				<p>A painted people there below we found,<br/> Who went about with footsteps very slow,<br/> Weeping and in their semblance tired and vanquished.<br/></p>
				<p>They had on mantles with the hoods low down<br/> Before their eyes, and fashioned of the cut<br/> That in Cologne they for the monks are made.<br/></p>
				<p>Without, they gilded are so that it dazzles;<br/> But inwardly all leaden and so heavy<br/> That Frederick used to put them on of straw.<br/></p>
				<p>O everlastingly fatiguing mantle!<br/> Again we turned us, still to the left hand<br/> Along with them, intent on their sad plaint;<br/></p>
				<p>But owing to the weight, that weary folk<br/> Came on so tardily, that we were new<br/> In company at each motion of the haunch.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I unto my Leader: “See thou find<br/> Some one who may by deed or name be known,<br/> And thus in going move thine eye about.”<br/></p>
				<p>And one, who understood the Tuscan speech,<br/> Cried to us from behind: “Stay ye your feet,<br/> Ye, who so run athwart the dusky air!<br/></p>
				<p>Perhaps thou’lt have from me what thou demandest.”<br/> Whereat the Leader turned him, and said: “Wait,<br/> And then according to his pace proceed.”<br/></p>
				<p>I stopped, and two beheld I show great haste<br/> Of spirit, in their faces, to be with me;<br/> But the burden and the narrow way delayed them.<br/></p>
				<p>When they came up, long with an eye askance<br/> They scanned me without uttering a word.<br/> Then to each other turned, and said together:<br/></p>
				<p>“He by the action of his throat seems living;<br/> And if they dead are, by what privilege<br/> Go they uncovered by the heavy stole?”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to me: “Tuscan, who to the college<br/> Of miserable hypocrites art come,<br/> Do not disdain to tell us who thou art.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to them: “Born was I, and grew up<br/> In the great town on the fair river of Arno,<br/> And with the body am I’ve always had.<br/></p>
				<p>But who are ye, in whom there trickles down<br/> Along your cheeks such grief as I behold?<br/> And what pain is upon you, that so sparkles?”<br/></p>
				<p>And one replied to me: “These orange cloaks<br/> Are made of lead so heavy, that the weights<br/> Cause in this way their balances to creak.<br/></p>
				<p>Frati Gaudenti were we, and Bolognese;<br/> I Catalano, and he Loderingo<br/> Named, and together taken by thy city,<br/></p>
				<p>As the wont is to take one man alone,<br/> For maintenance of its peace; and we were such<br/> That still it is apparent round Gardingo.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O Friars,” began I, “your iniquitous …”<br/> But said no more; for to mine eyes there rushed<br/> One crucified with three stakes on the ground.<br/></p>
				<p>When me he saw, he writhed himself all over,<br/> Blowing into his beard with suspirations;<br/> And the Friar Catalan, who noticed this,<br/></p>
				<p>Said to me: “This transfixed one, whom thou seest,<br/> Counselled the Pharisees that it was meet<br/> To put one man to torture for the people.<br/></p>
				<p>Crosswise and naked is he on the path,<br/> As thou perceivest; and he needs must feel,<br/> Whoever passes, first how much he weighs;<br/></p>
				<p>And in like mode his father-in-law is punished<br/> Within this moat, and the others of the council,<br/> Which for the Jews was a malignant seed.”<br/></p>
				<p>And thereupon I saw Virgilius marvel<br/> O’er him who was extended on the cross<br/> So vilely in eternal banishment.<br/></p>
				<p>Then he directed to the Friar this voice:<br/> “Be not displeased, if granted thee, to tell us<br/> If to the right hand any pass slope down<br/></p>
				<p>By which we two may issue forth from here,<br/> Without constraining some of the black angels<br/> To come and extricate us from this deep.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then he made answer: “Nearer than thou hopest<br/> There is a rock, that forth from the great circle<br/> Proceeds, and crosses all the cruel valleys,<br/></p>
				<p>Save that at this ’tis broken, and does not bridge it;<br/> You will be able to mount up the ruin,<br/> That sidelong slopes and at the bottom rises.”<br/></p>
				<p>The Leader stood awhile with head bowed down;<br/> Then said: “The business badly he recounted<br/> Who grapples with his hook the sinners yonder.”<br/></p>
				<p>And the Friar: “Many of the Devil’s vices<br/> Once heard I at Bologna, and among them,<br/> That he’s a liar and the father of lies.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thereat my Leader with great strides went on,<br/> Somewhat disturbed with anger in his looks;<br/> Whence from the heavy-laden I departed<br/></p>
				<p>After the prints of his beloved feet.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Seventh Bolgia: Thieves.⁠—Vanni Fucci</span>
				</h3>
				<p>In that part of the youthful year wherein<br/> The Sun his locks beneath Aquarius tempers,<br/> And now the nights draw near to half the day,<br/></p>
				<p>What time the hoar-frost copies on the ground<br/> The outward semblance of her sister white,<br/> But little lasts the temper of her pen,<br/></p>
				<p>The husbandman, whose forage faileth him,<br/> Rises, and looks, and seeth the champaign<br/> All gleaming white, whereat he beats his flank,<br/></p>
				<p>Returns in doors, and up and down laments,<br/> Like a poor wretch, who knows not what to do;<br/> Then he returns and hope revives again,<br/></p>
				<p>Seeing the world has changed its countenance<br/> In little time, and takes his shepherd’s crook,<br/> And forth the little lambs to pasture drives.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did the Master fill me with alarm,<br/> When I beheld his forehead so disturbed,<br/> And to the ailment came as soon the plaster.<br/></p>
				<p>For as we came unto the ruined bridge,<br/> The Leader turned to me with that sweet look<br/> Which at the mountain’s foot I first beheld.<br/></p>
				<p>His arms he opened, after some advisement<br/> Within himself elected, looking first<br/> Well at the ruin, and laid hold of me.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as he who acts and meditates,<br/> For aye it seems that he provides beforehand,<br/> So upward lifting me towards the summit<br/></p>
				<p>Of a huge rock, he scanned another crag,<br/> Saying: “To that one grapple afterwards,<br/> But try first if ’tis such that it will hold thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>This was no way for one clothed with a cloak;<br/> For hardly we, he light, and I pushed upward,<br/> Were able to ascend from jag to jag.<br/></p>
				<p>And had it not been, that upon that precinct<br/> Shorter was the ascent than on the other,<br/> He I know not, but I had been dead beat.<br/></p>
				<p>But because Malebolge tow’rds the mouth<br/> Of the profoundest well is all inclining,<br/> The structure of each valley doth import<br/></p>
				<p>That one bank rises and the other sinks.<br/> Still we arrived at length upon the point<br/> Wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder.<br/></p>
				<p>The breath was from my lungs so milked away,<br/> When I was up, that I could go no farther,<br/> Nay, I sat down upon my first arrival.<br/></p>
				<p>“Now it behoves thee thus to put off sloth,”<br/> My Master said; “for sitting upon down,<br/> Or under quilt, one cometh not to fame,<br/></p>
				<p>Withouten which whoso his life consumes<br/> Such vestige leaveth of himself on earth,<br/> As smoke in air or in the water foam.<br/></p>
				<p>And therefore raise thee up, o’ercome the anguish<br/> With spirit that o’ercometh every battle,<br/> If with its heavy body it sink not.<br/></p>
				<p>A longer stairway it behoves thee mount;<br/> ’Tis not enough from these to have departed;<br/> Let it avail thee, if thou understand me.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then I uprose, showing myself provided<br/> Better with breath than I did feel myself,<br/> And said: “Go on, for I am strong and bold.”<br/></p>
				<p>Upward we took our way along the crag,<br/> Which jagged was, and narrow, and difficult,<br/> And more precipitous far than that before.<br/></p>
				<p>Speaking I went, not to appear exhausted;<br/> Whereat a voice from the next moat came forth,<br/> Not well adapted to articulate words.<br/></p>
				<p>I know not what it said, though o’er the back<br/> I now was of the arch that passes there;<br/> But he seemed moved to anger who was speaking.<br/></p>
				<p>I was bent downward, but my living eyes<br/> Could not attain the bottom, for the dark;<br/> Wherefore I: “Master, see that thou arrive<br/></p>
				<p>At the next round, and let us descend the wall;<br/> For as from hence I hear and understand not,<br/> So I look down and nothing I distinguish.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Other response,” he said, “I make thee not,<br/> Except the doing; for the modest asking<br/> Ought to be followed by the deed in silence.”<br/></p>
				<p>We from the bridge descended at its head,<br/> Where it connects itself with the eighth bank,<br/> And then was manifest to me the Bolgia;<br/></p>
				<p>And I beheld therein a terrible throng<br/> Of serpents, and of such a monstrous kind,<br/> That the remembrance still congeals my blood<br/></p>
				<p>Let Libya boast no longer with her sand;<br/> For if Chelydri, Jaculi, and Phareae<br/> She breeds, with Cenchri and with Amphisbaena,<br/></p>
				<p>Neither so many plagues nor so malignant<br/> E’er showed she with all Ethiopia,<br/> Nor with whatever on the Red Sea is!<br/></p>
				<p>Among this cruel and most dismal throng<br/> People were running naked and affrighted.<br/> Without the hope of hole or heliotrope.<br/></p>
				<p>They had their hands with serpents bound behind them;<br/> These riveted upon their reins the tail<br/> And head, and were in front of them entwined.<br/></p>
				<p>And lo! at one who was upon our side<br/> There darted forth a serpent, which transfixed him<br/> There where the neck is knotted to the shoulders.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor ‘O’ so quickly e’er, nor ‘I’ was written,<br/> As he took fire, and burned; and ashes wholly<br/> Behoved it that in falling he became.<br/></p>
				<p>And when he on the ground was thus destroyed,<br/> The ashes drew together, and of themselves<br/> Into himself they instantly returned.<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus by the great sages ’tis confessed<br/> The phoenix dies, and then is born again,<br/> When it approaches its five-hundredth year;<br/></p>
				<p>On herb or grain it feeds not in its life,<br/> But only on tears of incense and amomum,<br/> And nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.<br/></p>
				<p>And as he is who falls, and knows not how,<br/> By force of demons who to earth down drag him,<br/> Or other oppilation that binds man,<br/></p>
				<p>When he arises and around him looks,<br/> Wholly bewildered by the mighty anguish<br/> Which he has suffered, and in looking sighs;<br/></p>
				<p>Such was that sinner after he had risen.<br/> Justice of God! O how severe it is,<br/> That blows like these in vengeance poureth down!<br/></p>
				<p>The Guide thereafter asked him who he was;<br/> Whence he replied: “I rained from Tuscany<br/> A short time since into this cruel gorge.<br/></p>
				<p>A bestial life, and not a human, pleased me,<br/> Even as the mule I was; I’m Vanni Fucci,<br/> Beast, and Pistoia was my worthy den.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I unto the Guide: “Tell him to stir not,<br/> And ask what crime has thrust him here below,<br/> For once a man of blood and wrath I saw him.”<br/></p>
				<p>And the sinner, who had heard, dissembled not,<br/> But unto me directed mind and face,<br/> And with a melancholy shame was painted.<br/></p>
				<p>Then said: “It pains me more that thou hast caught me<br/> Amid this misery where thou seest me,<br/> Than when I from the other life was taken.<br/></p>
				<p>What thou demandest I cannot deny;<br/> So low am I put down because I robbed<br/> The sacristy of the fair ornaments,<br/></p>
				<p>And falsely once ’twas laid upon another;<br/> But that thou mayst not such a sight enjoy,<br/> If thou shalt e’er be out of the dark places,<br/></p>
				<p>Thine ears to my announcement ope and hear:<br/> Pistoia first of Neri groweth meagre;<br/> Then Florence doth renew her men and manners;<br/></p>
				<p>Mars draws a vapour up from Val di Magra,<br/> Which is with turbid clouds enveloped round,<br/> And with impetuous and bitter tempest<br/></p>
				<p>Over Campo Picen shall be the battle;<br/> When it shall suddenly rend the mist asunder,<br/> So that each Bianco shall thereby be smitten.<br/></p>
				<p>And this I’ve said that it may give thee pain.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-25" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Agnello Brunelleschi, Buoso degli Abati, Puccio Sciancato, Cianfa de’ Donati, and Guercio Cavalcanti</span>
				</h3>
				<p>At the conclusion of his words, the thief<br/> Lifted his hands aloft with both the figs,<br/> Crying: “Take that, God, for at thee I aim them.”<br/></p>
				<p>From that time forth the serpents were my friends;<br/> For one entwined itself about his neck<br/> As if it said: “I will not thou speak more;”<br/></p>
				<p>And round his arms another, and rebound him,<br/> Clinching itself together so in front,<br/> That with them he could not a motion make.<br/></p>
				<p>Pistoia, ah, Pistoia! why resolve not<br/> To burn thyself to ashes and so perish,<br/> Since in ill-doing thou thy seed excellest?<br/></p>
				<p>Through all the sombre circles of this Hell,<br/> Spirit I saw not against God so proud,<br/> Not he who fell at Thebes down from the walls!<br/></p>
				<p>He fled away, and spake no further word;<br/> And I beheld a Centaur full of rage<br/> Come crying out: “Where is, where is the scoffer?”<br/></p>
				<p>I do not think Maremma has so many<br/> Serpents as he had all along his back,<br/> As far as where our countenance begins.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon the shoulders, just behind the nape,<br/> With wings wide open was a dragon lying,<br/> And he sets fire to all that he encounters.<br/></p>
				<p>My Master said: “That one is Cacus, who<br/> Beneath the rock upon Mount Aventine<br/> Created oftentimes a lake of blood.<br/></p>
				<p>He goes not on the same road with his brothers,<br/> By reason of the fraudulent theft he made<br/> Of the great herd, which he had near to him;<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat his tortuous actions ceased beneath<br/> The mace of Hercules, who peradventure<br/> Gave him a hundred, and he felt not ten.”<br/></p>
				<p>While he was speaking thus, he had passed by,<br/> And spirits three had underneath us come,<br/> Of which nor I aware was, nor my Leader,<br/></p>
				<p>Until what time they shouted: “Who are you?”<br/> On which account our story made a halt,<br/> And then we were intent on them alone.<br/></p>
				<p>I did not know them; but it came to pass,<br/> As it is wont to happen by some chance,<br/> That one to name the other was compelled,<br/></p>
				<p>Exclaiming: “Where can Cianfa have remained?”<br/> Whence I, so that the Leader might attend,<br/> Upward from chin to nose my finger laid.<br/></p>
				<p>If thou art, Reader, slow now to believe<br/> What I shall say, it will no marvel be,<br/> For I who saw it hardly can admit it.<br/></p>
				<p>As I was holding raised on them my brows,<br/> Behold! a serpent with six feet darts forth<br/> In front of one, and fastens wholly on him.<br/></p>
				<p>With middle feet it bound him round the paunch,<br/> And with the forward ones his arms it seized;<br/> Then thrust its teeth through one cheek and the other;<br/></p>
				<p>The hindermost it stretched upon his thighs,<br/> And put its tail through in between the two,<br/> And up behind along the reins outspread it.<br/></p>
				<p>Ivy was never fastened by its barbs<br/> Unto a tree so, as this horrible reptile<br/> Upon the other’s limbs entwined its own.<br/></p>
				<p>Then they stuck close, as if of heated wax<br/> They had been made, and intermixed their colour;<br/> Nor one nor other seemed now what he was;<br/></p>
				<p>E’en as proceedeth on before the flame<br/> Upward along the paper a brown colour,<br/> Which is not black as yet, and the white dies.<br/></p>
				<p>The other two looked on, and each of them<br/> Cried out: “O me, Agnello, how thou changest!<br/> Behold, thou now art neither two nor one.”<br/></p>
				<p>Already the two heads had one become,<br/> When there appeared to us two figures mingled<br/> Into one face, wherein the two were lost.<br/></p>
				<p>Of the four lists were fashioned the two arms,<br/> The thighs and legs, the belly and the chest<br/> Members became that never yet were seen.<br/></p>
				<p>Every original aspect there was cancelled;<br/> Two and yet none did the perverted image<br/> Appear, and such departed with slow pace.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a lizard, under the great scourge<br/> Of days canicular, exchanging hedge,<br/> Lightning appeareth if the road it cross;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did appear, coming towards the bellies<br/> Of the two others, a small fiery serpent,<br/> Livid and black as is a peppercorn.<br/></p>
				<p>And in that part whereat is first received<br/> Our aliment, it one of them transfixed;<br/> Then downward fell in front of him extended.<br/></p>
				<p>The one transfixed looked at it, but said naught;<br/> Nay, rather with feet motionless he yawned,<br/> Just as if sleep or fever had assailed him.<br/></p>
				<p>He at the serpent gazed, and it at him;<br/> One through the wound, the other through the mouth<br/> Smoked violently, and the smoke commingled.<br/></p>
				<p>Henceforth be silent Lucan, where he mentions<br/> Wretched Sabellus and Nassidius,<br/> And wait to hear what now shall be shot forth.<br/></p>
				<p>Be silent Ovid, of Cadmus and Arethusa;<br/> For if him to a snake, her to fountain,<br/> Converts he fabling, that I grudge him not;<br/></p>
				<p>Because two natures never front to front<br/> Has he transmuted, so that both the forms<br/> To interchange their matter ready were.<br/></p>
				<p>Together they responded in such wise,<br/> That to a fork the serpent cleft his tail,<br/> And eke the wounded drew his feet together.<br/></p>
				<p>The legs together with the thighs themselves<br/> Adhered so, that in little time the juncture<br/> No sign whatever made that was apparent.<br/></p>
				<p>He with the cloven tail assumed the figure<br/> The other one was losing, and his skin<br/> Became elastic, and the other’s hard.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw the arms draw inward at the armpits,<br/> And both feet of the reptile, that were short,<br/> Lengthen as much as those contracted were.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafter the hind feet, together twisted,<br/> Became the member that a man conceals,<br/> And of his own the wretch had two created.<br/></p>
				<p>While both of them the exhalation veils<br/> With a new colour, and engenders hair<br/> On one of them and depilates the other,<br/></p>
				<p>The one uprose and down the other fell,<br/> Though turning not away their impious lamps,<br/> Underneath which each one his muzzle changed.<br/></p>
				<p>He who was standing drew it tow’rds the temples,<br/> And from excess of matter, which came thither,<br/> Issued the ears from out the hollow cheeks;<br/></p>
				<p>What did not backward run and was retained<br/> Of that excess made to the face a nose,<br/> And the lips thickened far as was befitting.<br/></p>
				<p>He who lay prostrate thrusts his muzzle forward,<br/> And backward draws the ears into his head,<br/> In the same manner as the snail its horns;<br/></p>
				<p>And so the tongue, which was entire and apt<br/> For speech before, is cleft, and the bi-forked<br/> In the other closes up, and the smoke ceases.<br/></p>
				<p>The soul, which to a reptile had been changed,<br/> Along the valley hissing takes to flight,<br/> And after him the other speaking sputters.<br/></p>
				<p>Then did he turn upon him his new shoulders,<br/> And said to the other: “I’ll have Buoso run,<br/> Crawling as I have done, along this road.”<br/></p>
				<p>In this way I beheld the seventh ballast<br/> Shift and reshift, and here be my excuse<br/> The novelty, if aught my pen transgress.<br/></p>
				<p>And notwithstanding that mine eyes might be<br/> Somewhat bewildered, and my mind dismayed,<br/> They could not flee away so secretly<br/></p>
				<p>But that I plainly saw Puccio Sciancato;<br/> And he it was who sole of three companions,<br/> Which came in the beginning, was not changed;<br/></p>
				<p>The other was he whom thou, Gaville, weepest.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-26" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Eighth Bolgia: Evil Counsellors.⁠—Ulysses and Diomed</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Rejoice, O Florence, since thou art so great,<br/> That over sea and land thou beatest thy wings,<br/> And throughout Hell thy name is spread abroad!<br/></p>
				<p>Among the thieves five citizens of thine<br/> Like these I found, whence shame comes unto me,<br/> And thou thereby to no great honour risest.<br/></p>
				<p>But if when morn is near our dreams are true,<br/> Feel shalt thou in a little time from now<br/> What Prato, if none other, craves for thee.<br/></p>
				<p>And if it now were, it were not too soon;<br/> Would that it were, seeing it needs must be,<br/> For ’twill aggrieve me more the more I age.<br/></p>
				<p>We went our way, and up along the stairs<br/> The bourns had made us to descend before,<br/> Remounted my Conductor and drew me.<br/></p>
				<p>And following the solitary path<br/> Among the rocks and ridges of the crag,<br/> The foot without the hand sped not at all.<br/></p>
				<p>Then sorrowed I, and sorrow now again,<br/> When I direct my mind to what I saw,<br/> And more my genius curb than I am wont,<br/></p>
				<p>That it may run not unless virtue guide it;<br/> So that if some good star, or better thing,<br/> Have given me good, I may myself not grudge it.<br/></p>
				<p>As many as the hind (who on the hill<br/> Rests at the time when he who lights the world<br/> His countenance keeps least concealed from us,<br/></p>
				<p>While as the fly gives place unto the gnat)<br/> Seeth the glow-worms down along the valley,<br/> Perchance there where he ploughs and makes his vintage;<br/></p>
				<p>With flames as manifold resplendent all<br/> Was the eighth Bolgia, as I grew aware<br/> As soon as I was where the depth appeared.<br/></p>
				<p>And such as he who with the bears avenged him<br/> Beheld Elijah’s chariot at departing,<br/> What time the steeds to heaven erect uprose,<br/></p>
				<p>For with his eye he could not follow it<br/> So as to see aught else than flame alone,<br/> Even as a little cloud ascending upward,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus each along the gorge of the intrenchment<br/> Was moving; for not one reveals the theft,<br/> And every flame a sinner steals away.<br/></p>
				<p>I stood upon the bridge uprisen to see,<br/> So that, if I had seized not on a rock,<br/> Down had I fallen without being pushed.<br/></p>
				<p>And the Leader, who beheld me so attent,<br/> Exclaimed: “Within the fires the spirits are;<br/> Each swathes himself with that wherewith he burns.”<br/></p>
				<p>“My Master,” I replied, “by hearing thee<br/> I am more sure; but I surmised already<br/> It might be so, and already wished to ask thee<br/></p>
				<p>Who is within that fire, which comes so cleft<br/> At top, it seems uprising from the pyre<br/> Where was Eteocles with his brother placed.”<br/></p>
				<p>He answered me: “Within there are tormented<br/> Ulysses and Diomed, and thus together<br/> They unto vengeance run as unto wrath.<br/></p>
				<p>And there within their flame do they lament<br/> The ambush of the horse, which made the door<br/> Whence issued forth the Romans’ gentle seed;<br/></p>
				<p>Therein is wept the craft, for which being dead<br/> Deidamia still deplores Achilles,<br/> And pain for the Palladium there is borne.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If they within those sparks possess the power<br/> To speak,” I said, “thee, Master, much I pray,<br/> And re-pray, that the prayer be worth a thousand,<br/></p>
				<p>That thou make no denial of awaiting<br/> Until the horned flame shall hither come;<br/> Thou seest that with desire I lean towards it.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Worthy is thy entreaty<br/> Of much applause, and therefore I accept it;<br/> But take heed that thy tongue restrain itself.<br/></p>
				<p>Leave me to speak, because I have conceived<br/> That which thou wishest; for they might disdain<br/> Perchance, since they were Greeks, discourse of thine.”<br/></p>
				<p>When now the flame had come unto that point,<br/> Where to my Leader it seemed time and place,<br/> After this fashion did I hear him speak:<br/></p>
				<p>“O ye, who are twofold within one fire,<br/> If I deserved of you, while I was living,<br/> If I deserved of you or much or little<br/></p>
				<p>When in the world I wrote the lofty verses,<br/> Do not move on, but one of you declare<br/> Whither, being lost, he went away to die.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then of the antique flame the greater horn,<br/> Murmuring, began to wave itself about<br/> Even as a flame doth which the wind fatigues.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafterward, the summit to and fro<br/> Moving as if it were the tongue that spake,<br/> It uttered forth a voice, and said: “When I<br/></p>
				<p>From Circe had departed, who concealed me<br/> More than a year there near unto Gaeta,<br/> Or ever yet Aeneas named it so,<br/></p>
				<p>Nor fondness for my son, nor reverence<br/> For my old father, nor the due affection<br/> Which joyous should have made Penelope,<br/></p>
				<p>Could overcome within me the desire<br/> I had to be experienced of the world,<br/> And of the vice and virtue of mankind;<br/></p>
				<p>But I put forth on the high open sea<br/> With one sole ship, and that small company<br/> By which I never had deserted been.<br/></p>
				<p>Both of the shores I saw as far as Spain,<br/> Far as Morocco, and the isle of Sardes,<br/> And the others which that sea bathes round about.<br/></p>
				<p>I and my company were old and slow<br/> When at that narrow passage we arrived<br/> Where Hercules his landmarks set as signals,<br/></p>
				<p>That man no farther onward should adventure.<br/> On the right hand behind me left I Seville,<br/> And on the other already had left Ceuta.<br/></p>
				<p>‘O brothers, who amid a hundred thousand<br/> Perils,’ I said, ‘have come unto the West,<br/> To this so inconsiderable vigil<br/></p>
				<p>Which is remaining of your senses still<br/> Be ye unwilling to deny the knowledge,<br/> Following the sun, of the unpeopled world.<br/></p>
				<p>Consider ye the seed from which ye sprang;<br/> Ye were not made to live like unto brutes,<br/> But for pursuit of virtue and of knowledge.’<br/></p>
				<p>So eager did I render my companions,<br/> With this brief exhortation, for the voyage,<br/> That then I hardly could have held them back.<br/></p>
				<p>And having turned our stern unto the morning,<br/> We of the oars made wings for our mad flight,<br/> Evermore gaining on the larboard side.<br/></p>
				<p>Already all the stars of the other pole<br/> The night beheld, and ours so very low<br/> It did not rise above the ocean floor.<br/></p>
				<p>Five times rekindled and as many quenched<br/> Had been the splendour underneath the moon,<br/> Since we had entered into the deep pass,<br/></p>
				<p>When there appeared to us a mountain, dim<br/> From distance, and it seemed to me so high<br/> As I had never any one beheld.<br/></p>
				<p>Joyful were we, and soon it turned to weeping;<br/> For out of the new land a whirlwind rose,<br/> And smote upon the fore part of the ship.<br/></p>
				<p>Three times it made her whirl with all the waters,<br/> At the fourth time it made the stern uplift,<br/> And the prow downward go, as pleased Another,<br/></p>
				<p>Until the sea above us closed again.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-27" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Guido da Montefeltro</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Already was the flame erect and quiet,<br/> To speak no more, and now departed from us<br/> With the permission of the gentle Poet;<br/></p>
				<p>When yet another, which behind it came,<br/> Caused us to turn our eyes upon its top<br/> By a confused sound that issued from it.<br/></p>
				<p>As the Sicilian bull (that bellowed first<br/> With the lament of him, and that was right,<br/> Who with his file had modulated it)<br/></p>
				<p>Bellowed so with the voice of the afflicted,<br/> That, notwithstanding it was made of brass,<br/> Still it appeared with agony transfixed;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus, by not having any way or issue<br/> At first from out the fire, to its own language<br/> Converted were the melancholy words.<br/></p>
				<p>But afterwards, when they had gathered way<br/> Up through the point, giving it that vibration<br/> The tongue had given them in their passage out,<br/></p>
				<p>We heard it said: “O thou, at whom I aim<br/> My voice, and who but now wast speaking Lombard,<br/> Saying, ‘Now go thy way, no more I urge thee,’<br/></p>
				<p>Because I come perchance a little late,<br/> To stay and speak with me let it not irk thee;<br/> Thou seest it irks not me, and I am burning.<br/></p>
				<p>If thou but lately into this blind world<br/> Hast fallen down from that sweet Latian land,<br/> Wherefrom I bring the whole of my transgression,<br/></p>
				<p>Say, if the Romagnuols have peace or war,<br/> For I was from the mountains there between<br/> Urbino and the yoke whence Tiber bursts.”<br/></p>
				<p>I still was downward bent and listening,<br/> When my Conductor touched me on the side,<br/> Saying: “Speak thou: this one a Latian is.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I, who had beforehand my reply<br/> In readiness, forthwith began to speak:<br/> “O soul, that down below there art concealed,<br/></p>
				<p>Romagna thine is not and never has been<br/> Without war in the bosom of its tyrants;<br/> But open war I none have left there now.<br/></p>
				<p>Ravenna stands as it long years has stood;<br/> The Eagle of Polenta there is brooding,<br/> So that she covers Cervia with her vans.<br/></p>
				<p>The city which once made the long resistance,<br/> And of the French a sanguinary heap,<br/> Beneath the Green Paws finds itself again;<br/></p>
				<p>Verrucchio’s ancient Mastiff and the new,<br/> Who made such bad disposal of Montagna,<br/> Where they are wont make wimbles of their teeth.<br/></p>
				<p>The cities of Lamone and Santerno<br/> Governs the Lioncel of the white lair,<br/> Who changes sides ’twixt summer-time and winter;<br/></p>
				<p>And that of which the Savio bathes the flank,<br/> Even as it lies between the plain and mountain,<br/> Lives between tyranny and a free state.<br/></p>
				<p>Now I entreat thee tell us who thou art;<br/> Be not more stubborn than the rest have been,<br/> So may thy name hold front there in the world.”<br/></p>
				<p>After the fire a little more had roared<br/> In its own fashion, the sharp point it moved<br/> This way and that, and then gave forth such breath:<br/></p>
				<p>“If I believed that my reply were made<br/> To one who to the world would e’er return,<br/> This flame without more flickering would stand still;<br/></p>
				<p>But inasmuch as never from this depth<br/> Did any one return, if I hear true,<br/> Without the fear of infamy I answer,<br/></p>
				<p>I was a man of arms, then Cordelier,<br/> Believing thus begirt to make amends;<br/> And truly my belief had been fulfilled<br/></p>
				<p>But for the High Priest, whom may ill betide,<br/> Who put me back into my former sins;<br/> And how and wherefore I will have thee hear.<br/></p>
				<p>While I was still the form of bone and pulp<br/> My mother gave to me, the deeds I did<br/> Were not those of a lion, but a fox.<br/></p>
				<p>The machinations and the covert ways<br/> I knew them all, and practised so their craft,<br/> That to the ends of earth the sound went forth.<br/></p>
				<p>When now unto that portion of mine age<br/> I saw myself arrived, when each one ought<br/> To lower the sails, and coil away the ropes,<br/></p>
				<p>That which before had pleased me then displeased me;<br/> And penitent and confessing I surrendered,<br/> Ah woe is me! and it would have bestead me;<br/></p>
				<p>The Leader of the modern Pharisees<br/> Having a war near unto Lateran,<br/> And not with Saracens nor with the Jews,<br/></p>
				<p>For each one of his enemies was Christian,<br/> And none of them had been to conquer Acre,<br/> Nor merchandising in the Sultan’s land,<br/></p>
				<p>Nor the high office, nor the sacred orders,<br/> In him regarded, nor in me that cord<br/> Which used to make those girt with it more meagre;<br/></p>
				<p>But even as Constantine sought out Sylvester<br/> To cure his leprosy, within Soracte,<br/> So this one sought me out as an adept<br/></p>
				<p>To cure him of the fever of his pride.<br/> Counsel he asked of me, and I was silent,<br/> Because his words appeared inebriate.<br/></p>
				<p>And then he said: ‘Be not thy heart afraid;<br/> Henceforth I thee absolve; and thou instruct me<br/> How to raze Palestrina to the ground.<br/></p>
				<p>Heaven have I power to lock and to unlock,<br/> As thou dost know; therefore the keys are two,<br/> The which my predecessor held not dear.’<br/></p>
				<p>Then urged me on his weighty arguments<br/> There, where my silence was the worst advice;<br/> And said I: ‘Father, since thou washest me<br/></p>
				<p>Of that sin into which I now must fall,<br/> The promise long with the fulfilment short<br/> Will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat.’<br/></p>
				<p>Francis came afterward, when I was dead,<br/> For me; but one of the black Cherubim<br/> Said to him: ‘Take him not; do me no wrong;<br/></p>
				<p>He must come down among my servitors,<br/> Because he gave the fraudulent advice<br/> From which time forth I have been at his hair;<br/></p>
				<p>For who repents not cannot be absolved,<br/> Nor can one both repent and will at once,<br/> Because of the contradiction which consents not.’<br/></p>
				<p>O miserable me! how I did shudder<br/> When he seized on me, saying: ‘Peradventure<br/> Thou didst not think that I was a logician!’<br/></p>
				<p>He bore me unto Minos, who entwined<br/> Eight times his tail about his stubborn back,<br/> And after he had bitten it in great rage,<br/></p>
				<p>Said: ‘Of the thievish fire a culprit this;’<br/> Wherefore, here where thou seest, am I lost,<br/> And vested thus in going I bemoan me.”<br/></p>
				<p>When it had thus completed its recital,<br/> The flame departed uttering lamentations,<br/> Writhing and flapping its sharp-pointed horn.<br/></p>
				<p>Onward we passed, both I and my Conductor,<br/> Up o’er the crag above another arch,<br/> Which the moat covers, where is paid the fee<br/></p>
				<p>By those who, sowing discord, win their burden.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-28" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Ninth Bolgia: Schismatics.⁠—Mahomet and Ali.⁠—Pier da Medicina, Curio, Mosca, and Bertrand de Born</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Who ever could, e’en with untrammelled words,<br/> Tell of the blood and of the wounds in full<br/> Which now I saw, by many times narrating?<br/></p>
				<p>Each tongue would for a certainty fall short<br/> By reason of our speech and memory,<br/> That have small room to comprehend so much.<br/></p>
				<p>If were again assembled all the people<br/> Which formerly upon the fateful land<br/> Of Puglia were lamenting for their blood<br/></p>
				<p>Shed by the Romans and the lingering war<br/> That of the rings made such illustrious spoils,<br/> As Livy has recorded, who errs not,<br/></p>
				<p>With those who felt the agony of blows<br/> By making counterstand to Robert Guiscard,<br/> And all the rest, whose bones are gathered still<br/></p>
				<p>At Ceperano, where a renegade<br/> Was each Apulian, and at Tagliacozzo,<br/> Where without arms the old Alardo conquered,<br/></p>
				<p>And one his limb transpierced, and one lopped off,<br/> Should show, it would be nothing to compare<br/> With the disgusting mode of the ninth Bolgia.<br/></p>
				<p>A cask by losing centre-piece or cant<br/> Was never shattered so, as I saw one<br/> Rent from the chin to where one breaketh wind.<br/></p>
				<p>Between his legs were hanging down his entrails;<br/> His heart was visible, and the dismal sack<br/> That maketh excrement of what is eaten.<br/></p>
				<p>While I was all absorbed in seeing him,<br/> He looked at me, and opened with his hands<br/> His bosom, saying: “See now how I rend me;<br/></p>
				<p>How mutilated, see, is Mahomet;<br/> In front of me doth Ali weeping go,<br/> Cleft in the face from forelock unto chin;<br/></p>
				<p>And all the others whom thou here beholdest,<br/> Disseminators of scandal and of schism<br/> While living were, and therefore are cleft thus.<br/></p>
				<p>A devil is behind here, who doth cleave us<br/> Thus cruelly, unto the falchion’s edge<br/> Putting again each one of all this ream,<br/></p>
				<p>When we have gone around the doleful road;<br/> By reason that our wounds are closed again<br/> Ere any one in front of him repass.<br/></p>
				<p>But who art thou, that musest on the crag,<br/> Perchance to postpone going to the pain<br/> That is adjudged upon thine accusations?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Nor death hath reached him yet, nor guilt doth bring him,”<br/> My Master made reply, “to be tormented;<br/> But to procure him full experience,<br/></p>
				<p>Me, who am dead, behoves it to conduct him<br/> Down here through Hell, from circle unto circle;<br/> And this is true as that I speak to thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>More than a hundred were there when they heard him,<br/> Who in the moat stood still to look at me,<br/> Through wonderment oblivious of their torture.<br/></p>
				<p>“Now say to Fra Dolcino, then, to arm him,<br/> Thou, who perhaps wilt shortly see the sun,<br/> If soon he wish not here to follow me,<br/></p>
				<p>So with provisions, that no stress of snow<br/> May give the victory to the Novarese,<br/> Which otherwise to gain would not be easy.”<br/></p>
				<p>After one foot to go away he lifted,<br/> This word did Mahomet say unto me,<br/> Then to depart upon the ground he stretched it.<br/></p>
				<p>Another one, who had his throat pierced through,<br/> And nose cut off close underneath the brows,<br/> And had no longer but a single ear,<br/></p>
				<p>Staying to look in wonder with the others,<br/> Before the others did his gullet open,<br/> Which outwardly was red in every part,<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “O thou, whom guilt doth not condemn,<br/> And whom I once saw up in Latian land,<br/> Unless too great similitude deceive me,<br/></p>
				<p>Call to remembrance Pier da Medicina,<br/> If e’er thou see again the lovely plain<br/> That from Vercelli slopes to Marcabo,<br/></p>
				<p>And make it known to the best two of Fano,<br/> To Messer Guido and Angiolello likewise,<br/> That if foreseeing here be not in vain,<br/></p>
				<p>Cast over from their vessel shall they be,<br/> And drowned near unto the Cattolica,<br/> By the betrayal of a tyrant fell.<br/></p>
				<p>Between the isles of Cyprus and Majorca<br/> Neptune ne’er yet beheld so great a crime,<br/> Neither of pirates nor Argolic people.<br/></p>
				<p>That traitor, who sees only with one eye,<br/> And holds the land, which some one here with me<br/> Would fain be fasting from the vision of,<br/></p>
				<p>Will make them come unto a parley with him;<br/> Then will do so, that to Focara’s wind<br/> They will not stand in need of vow or prayer.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “Show to me and declare,<br/> If thou wouldst have me bear up news of thee,<br/> Who is this person of the bitter vision.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then did he lay his hand upon the jaw<br/> Of one of his companions, and his mouth<br/> Oped, crying: “This is he, and he speaks not.<br/></p>
				<p>This one, being banished, every doubt submerged<br/> In Caesar by affirming the forearmed<br/> Always with detriment allowed delay.”<br/></p>
				<p>O how bewildered unto me appeared,<br/> With tongue asunder in his windpipe slit,<br/> Curio, who in speaking was so bold!<br/></p>
				<p>And one, who both his hands dissevered had,<br/> The stumps uplifting through the murky air,<br/> So that the blood made horrible his face,<br/></p>
				<p>Cried out: “Thou shalt remember Mosca also,<br/> Who said, alas! ‘A thing done has an end!’<br/> Which was an ill seed for the Tuscan people.”<br/></p>
				<p>“And death unto thy race,” thereto I added;<br/> Whence he, accumulating woe on woe,<br/> Departed, like a person sad and crazed.<br/></p>
				<p>But I remained to look upon the crowd;<br/> And saw a thing which I should be afraid,<br/> Without some further proof, even to recount,<br/></p>
				<p>If it were not that conscience reassures me,<br/> That good companion which emboldens man<br/> Beneath the hauberk of its feeling pure.<br/></p>
				<p>I truly saw, and still I seem to see it,<br/> A trunk without a head walk in like manner<br/> As walked the others of the mournful herd.<br/></p>
				<p>And by the hair it held the head dissevered,<br/> Hung from the hand in fashion of a lantern,<br/> And that upon us gazed and said: “O me!”<br/></p>
				<p>It of itself made to itself a lamp,<br/> And they were two in one, and one in two;<br/> How that can be, He knows who so ordains it.<br/></p>
				<p>When it was come close to the bridge’s foot,<br/> It lifted high its arm with all the head,<br/> To bring more closely unto us its words,<br/></p>
				<p>Which were: “Behold now the sore penalty,<br/> Thou, who dost breathing go the dead beholding;<br/> Behold if any be as great as this.<br/></p>
				<p>And so that thou may carry news of me,<br/> Know that Bertram de Born am I, the same<br/> Who gave to the Young King the evil comfort.<br/></p>
				<p>I made the father and the son rebellious;<br/> Achitophel not more with Absalom<br/> And David did with his accursed goadings.<br/></p>
				<p>Because I parted persons so united,<br/> Parted do I now bear my brain, alas!<br/> From its beginning, which is in this trunk.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus is observed in me the counterpoise.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-29" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Tenth Bolgia: Alchemists.⁠—Griffolino d’ Arezzo and Capocchio</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The many people and the divers wounds<br/> These eyes of mine had so inebriated,<br/> That they were wishful to stand still and weep;<br/></p>
				<p>But said Virgilius: “What dost thou still gaze at?<br/> Why is thy sight still riveted down there<br/> Among the mournful, mutilated shades?<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hast not done so at the other Bolge;<br/> Consider, if to count them thou believest,<br/> That two-and-twenty miles the valley winds,<br/></p>
				<p>And now the moon is underneath our feet;<br/> Henceforth the time allotted us is brief,<br/> And more is to be seen than what thou seest.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If thou hadst,” I made answer thereupon,<br/> “Attended to the cause for which I looked,<br/> Perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned.”<br/></p>
				<p>Meanwhile my Guide departed, and behind him<br/> I went, already making my reply,<br/> And superadding: “In that cavern where<br/></p>
				<p>I held mine eyes with such attention fixed,<br/> I think a spirit of my blood laments<br/> The sin which down below there costs so much.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said the Master: “Be no longer broken<br/> Thy thought from this time forward upon him;<br/> Attend elsewhere, and there let him remain;<br/></p>
				<p>For him I saw below the little bridge,<br/> Pointing at thee, and threatening with his finger<br/> Fiercely, and heard him called Geri del Bello.<br/></p>
				<p>So wholly at that time wast thou impeded<br/> By him who formerly held Altaforte,<br/> Thou didst not look that way; so he departed.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O my Conductor, his own violent death,<br/> Which is not yet avenged for him,” I said,<br/> “By any who is sharer in the shame,<br/></p>
				<p>Made him disdainful; whence he went away,<br/> As I imagine, without speaking to me,<br/> And thereby made me pity him the more.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did we speak as far as the first place<br/> Upon the crag, which the next valley shows<br/> Down to the bottom, if there were more light.<br/></p>
				<p>When we were now right over the last cloister<br/> Of Malebolge, so that its lay-brothers<br/> Could manifest themselves unto our sight,<br/></p>
				<p>Divers lamentings pierced me through and through,<br/> Which with compassion had their arrows barbed,<br/> Whereat mine ears I covered with my hands.<br/></p>
				<p>What pain would be, if from the hospitals<br/> Of Valdichiana, ’twixt July and September,<br/> And of Maremma and Sardinia<br/></p>
				<p>All the diseases in one moat were gathered,<br/> Such was it here, and such a stench came from it<br/> As from putrescent limbs is wont to issue.<br/></p>
				<p>We had descended on the furthest bank<br/> From the long crag, upon the left hand still,<br/> And then more vivid was my power of sight<br/></p>
				<p>Down tow’rds the bottom, where the ministress<br/> Of the high Lord, Justice infallible,<br/> Punishes forgers, which she here records.<br/></p>
				<p>I do not think a sadder sight to see<br/> Was in Aegina the whole people sick,<br/> (When was the air so full of pestilence,<br/></p>
				<p>The animals, down to the little worm,<br/> All fell, and afterwards the ancient people,<br/> According as the poets have affirmed,<br/></p>
				<p>Were from the seed of ants restored again,)<br/> Than was it to behold through that dark valley<br/> The spirits languishing in divers heaps.<br/></p>
				<p>This on the belly, that upon the back<br/> One of the other lay, and others crawling<br/> Shifted themselves along the dismal road.<br/></p>
				<p>We step by step went onward without speech,<br/> Gazing upon and listening to the sick<br/> Who had not strength enough to lift their bodies.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw two sitting leaned against each other,<br/> As leans in heating platter against platter,<br/> From head to foot bespotted o’er with scabs;<br/></p>
				<p>And never saw I plied a currycomb<br/> By stable-boy for whom his master waits,<br/> Or him who keeps awake unwillingly,<br/></p>
				<p>As every one was plying fast the bite<br/> Of nails upon himself, for the great rage<br/> Of itching which no other succour had.<br/></p>
				<p>And the nails downward with them dragged the scab,<br/> In fashion as a knife the scales of bream,<br/> Or any other fish that has them largest.<br/></p>
				<p>“O thou, that with thy fingers dost dismail thee,”<br/> Began my Leader unto one of them,<br/> “And makest of them pincers now and then,<br/></p>
				<p>Tell me if any Latian is with those<br/> Who are herein; so may thy nails suffice thee<br/> To all eternity unto this work.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Latians are we, whom thou so wasted seest,<br/> Both of us here,” one weeping made reply;<br/> “But who art thou, that questionest about us?”<br/></p>
				<p>And said the Guide: “One am I who descends<br/> Down with this living man from cliff to cliff,<br/> And I intend to show Hell unto him.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then broken was their mutual support,<br/> And trembling each one turned himself to me,<br/> With others who had heard him by rebound.<br/></p>
				<p>Wholly to me did the good Master gather,<br/> Saying: “Say unto them whate’er thou wishest.”<br/> And I began, since he would have it so:<br/></p>
				<p>“So may your memory not steal away<br/> In the first world from out the minds of men,<br/> But so may it survive ’neath many suns,<br/></p>
				<p>Say to me who ye are, and of what people;<br/> Let not your foul and loathsome punishment<br/> Make you afraid to show yourselves to me.”<br/></p>
				<p>“I of Arezzo was,” one made reply,<br/> “And Albert of Siena had me burned;<br/> But what I died for does not bring me here.<br/></p>
				<p>’Tis true I said to him, speaking in jest,<br/> That I could rise by flight into the air,<br/> And he who had conceit, but little wit,<br/></p>
				<p>Would have me show to him the art; and only<br/> Because no Daedalus I made him, made me<br/> Be burned by one who held him as his son.<br/></p>
				<p>But unto the last Bolgia of the ten,<br/> For alchemy, which in the world I practised,<br/> Minos, who cannot err, has me condemned.”<br/></p>
				<p>And to the Poet said I: “Now was ever<br/> So vain a people as the Sienese?<br/> Not for a certainty the French by far.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat the other leper, who had heard me,<br/> Replied unto my speech: “Taking out Stricca,<br/> Who knew the art of moderate expenses,<br/></p>
				<p>And Niccolo, who the luxurious use<br/> Of cloves discovered earliest of all<br/> Within that garden where such seed takes root;<br/></p>
				<p>And taking out the band, among whom squandered<br/> Caccia d’Ascian his vineyards and vast woods,<br/> And where his wit the Abbagliato proffered!<br/></p>
				<p>But, that thou know who thus doth second thee<br/> Against the Sienese, make sharp thine eye<br/> Tow’rds me, so that my face well answer thee,<br/></p>
				<p>And thou shalt see I am Capocchio’s shade,<br/> Who metals falsified by alchemy;<br/> Thou must remember, if I well descry thee,<br/></p>
				<p>How I a skilful ape of nature was.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-30" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Other Falsifiers or Forgers.⁠—Gianni Schicchi, Myrrha, Adam of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Brescia</span>, Potiphar’s Wife, and Sinon of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Troy</span></span>
				</h3>
				<p>’Twas at the time when Juno was enraged,<br/> For Semele, against the Theban blood,<br/> As she already more than once had shown,<br/></p>
				<p>So reft of reason Athamas became,<br/> That, seeing his own wife with children twain<br/> Walking encumbered upon either hand,<br/></p>
				<p>He cried: “Spread out the nets, that I may take<br/> The lioness and her whelps upon the passage;”<br/> And then extended his unpitying claws,<br/></p>
				<p>Seizing the first, who had the name Learchus,<br/> And whirled him round, and dashed him on a rock;<br/> And she, with the other burthen, drowned herself;⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>And at the time when fortune downward hurled<br/> The Trojan’s arrogance, that all things dared,<br/> So that the king was with his kingdom crushed,<br/></p>
				<p>Hecuba sad, disconsolate, and captive,<br/> When lifeless she beheld Polyxena,<br/> And of her Polydorus on the shore<br/></p>
				<p>Of ocean was the dolorous one aware,<br/> Out of her senses like a dog she barked,<br/> So much the anguish had her mind distorted;<br/></p>
				<p>But not of Thebes the furies nor the Trojan<br/> Were ever seen in any one so cruel<br/> In goading beasts, and much more human members,<br/></p>
				<p>As I beheld two shadows pale and naked,<br/> Who, biting, in the manner ran along<br/> That a boar does, when from the sty turned loose.<br/></p>
				<p>One to Capocchio came, and by the nape<br/> Seized with its teeth his neck, so that in dragging<br/> It made his belly grate the solid bottom.<br/></p>
				<p>And the Aretine, who trembling had remained,<br/> Said to me: “That mad sprite is Gianni Schicchi,<br/> And raving goes thus harrying other people.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O,” said I to him, “so may not the other<br/> Set teeth on thee, let it not weary thee<br/> To tell us who it is, ere it dart hence.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “That is the ancient ghost<br/> Of the nefarious Myrrha, who became<br/> Beyond all rightful love her father’s lover.<br/></p>
				<p>She came to sin with him after this manner,<br/> By counterfeiting of another’s form;<br/> As he who goeth yonder undertook,<br/></p>
				<p>That he might gain the lady of the herd,<br/> To counterfeit in himself Buoso Donati,<br/> Making a will and giving it due form.”<br/></p>
				<p>And after the two maniacs had passed<br/> On whom I held mine eye, I turned it back<br/> To look upon the other evil-born.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw one made in fashion of a lute,<br/> If he had only had the groin cut off<br/> Just at the point at which a man is forked.<br/></p>
				<p>The heavy dropsy, that so disproportions<br/> The limbs with humours, which it ill concocts,<br/> That the face corresponds not to the belly,<br/></p>
				<p>Compelled him so to hold his lips apart<br/> As does the hectic, who because of thirst<br/> One tow’rds the chin, the other upward turns.<br/></p>
				<p>“O ye, who without any torment are,<br/> And why I know not, in the world of woe,”<br/> He said to us, “behold, and be attentive<br/></p>
				<p>Unto the misery of Master Adam;<br/> I had while living much of what I wished,<br/> And now, alas! a drop of water crave.<br/></p>
				<p>The rivulets, that from the verdant hills<br/> Of Cassentin descend down into Arno,<br/> Making their channels to be cold and moist,<br/></p>
				<p>Ever before me stand, and not in vain;<br/> For far more doth their image dry me up<br/> Than the disease which strips my face of flesh.<br/></p>
				<p>The rigid justice that chastises me<br/> Draweth occasion from the place in which<br/> I sinned, to put the more my sighs in flight.<br/></p>
				<p>There is Romena, where I counterfeited<br/> The currency imprinted with the Baptist,<br/> For which I left my body burned above.<br/></p>
				<p>But if I here could see the tristful soul<br/> Of Guido, or Alessandro, or their brother,<br/> For Branda’s fount I would not give the sight.<br/></p>
				<p>One is within already, if the raving<br/> Shades that are going round about speak truth;<br/> But what avails it me, whose limbs are tied?<br/></p>
				<p>If I were only still so light, that in<br/> A hundred years I could advance one inch,<br/> I had already started on the way,<br/></p>
				<p>Seeking him out among this squalid folk,<br/> Although the circuit be eleven miles,<br/> And be not less than half a mile across.<br/></p>
				<p>For them am I in such a family;<br/> They did induce me into coining florins,<br/> Which had three carats of impurity.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “Who are the two poor wretches<br/> That smoke like unto a wet hand in winter,<br/> Lying there close upon thy right-hand confines?”<br/></p>
				<p>“I found them here,” replied he, “when I rained<br/> Into this chasm, and since they have not turned,<br/> Nor do I think they will for evermore.<br/></p>
				<p>One the false woman is who accused Joseph,<br/> The other the false Sinon, Greek of Troy;<br/> From acute fever they send forth such reek.”<br/></p>
				<p>And one of them, who felt himself annoyed<br/> At being, peradventure, named so darkly,<br/> Smote with the fist upon his hardened paunch.<br/></p>
				<p>It gave a sound, as if it were a drum;<br/> And Master Adam smote him in the face,<br/> With arm that did not seem to be less hard,<br/></p>
				<p>Saying to him: “Although be taken from me<br/> All motion, for my limbs that heavy are,<br/> I have an arm unfettered for such need.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat he answer made: “When thou didst go<br/> Unto the fire, thou hadst it not so ready:<br/> But hadst it so and more when thou wast coining.”<br/></p>
				<p>The dropsical: “Thou sayest true in that;<br/> But thou wast not so true a witness there,<br/> Where thou wast questioned of the truth at Troy.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If I spake false, thou falsifiedst the coin,”<br/> Said Sinon; “and for one fault I am here,<br/> And thou for more than any other demon.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Remember, perjurer, about the horse,”<br/> He made reply who had the swollen belly,<br/> “And rueful be it thee the whole world knows it.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Rueful to thee the thirst be wherewith cracks<br/> Thy tongue,” the Greek said, “and the putrid water<br/> That hedges so thy paunch before thine eyes.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then the false-coiner: “So is gaping wide<br/> Thy mouth for speaking evil, as ’tis wont;<br/> Because if I have thirst, and humour stuff me<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hast the burning and the head that aches,<br/> And to lick up the mirror of Narcissus<br/> Thou wouldst not want words many to invite thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>In listening to them was I wholly fixed,<br/> When said the Master to me: “Now just look,<br/> For little wants it that I quarrel with thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>When him I heard in anger speak to me,<br/> I turned me round towards him with such shame<br/> That still it eddies through my memory.<br/></p>
				<p>And as he is who dreams of his own harm,<br/> Who dreaming wishes it may be a dream,<br/> So that he craves what is, as if it were not;<br/></p>
				<p>Such I became, not having power to speak,<br/> For to excuse myself I wished, and still<br/> Excused myself, and did not think I did it.<br/></p>
				<p>“Less shame doth wash away a greater fault,”<br/> The Master said, “than this of thine has been;<br/> Therefore thyself disburden of all sadness,<br/></p>
				<p>And make account that I am aye beside thee,<br/> If e’er it come to pass that fortune bring thee<br/> Where there are people in a like dispute;<br/></p>
				<p>For a base wish it is to wish to hear it.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-31" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Giants, Nimrod, Ephialtes, and Antaeus</span>
				</h3>
				<p>One and the selfsame tongue first wounded me,<br/> So that it tinged the one cheek and the other,<br/> And then held out to me the medicine;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus do I hear that once Achilles’ spear,<br/> His and his father’s, used to be the cause<br/> First of a sad and then a gracious boon.<br/></p>
				<p>We turned our backs upon the wretched valley,<br/> Upon the bank that girds it round about,<br/> Going across it without any speech.<br/></p>
				<p>There it was less than night, and less than day,<br/> So that my sight went little in advance;<br/> But I could hear the blare of a loud horn,<br/></p>
				<p>So loud it would have made each thunder faint,<br/> Which, counter to it following its way,<br/> Mine eyes directed wholly to one place.<br/></p>
				<p>After the dolorous discomfiture<br/> When Charlemagne the holy emprise lost,<br/> So terribly Orlando sounded not.<br/></p>
				<p>Short while my head turned thitherward I held<br/> When many lofty towers I seemed to see,<br/> Whereat I: “Master, say, what town is this?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Because thou peerest forth<br/> Athwart the darkness at too great a distance,<br/> It happens that thou errest in thy fancy.<br/></p>
				<p>Well shalt thou see, if thou arrivest there,<br/> How much the sense deceives itself by distance;<br/> Therefore a little faster spur thee on.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then tenderly he took me by the hand,<br/> And said: “Before we farther have advanced,<br/> That the reality may seem to thee<br/></p>
				<p>Less strange, know that these are not towers, but giants,<br/> And they are in the well, around the bank,<br/> From navel downward, one and all of them.”<br/></p>
				<p>As, when the fog is vanishing away,<br/> Little by little doth the sight refigure<br/> Whate’er the mist that crowds the air conceals,<br/></p>
				<p>So, piercing through the dense and darksome air,<br/> More and more near approaching tow’rd the verge,<br/> My error fled, and fear came over me;<br/></p>
				<p>Because as on its circular parapets<br/> Montereggione crowns itself with towers,<br/> E’en thus the margin which surrounds the well<br/></p>
				<p>With one half of their bodies turreted<br/> The horrible giants, whom Jove menaces<br/> E’en now from out the heavens when he thunders.<br/></p>
				<p>And I of one already saw the face,<br/> Shoulders, and breast, and great part of the belly,<br/> And down along his sides both of the arms.<br/></p>
				<p>Certainly Nature, when she left the making<br/> Of animals like these, did well indeed,<br/> By taking such executors from Mars;<br/></p>
				<p>And if of elephants and whales she doth not<br/> Repent her, whosoever looketh subtly<br/> More just and more discreet will hold her for it;<br/></p>
				<p>For where the argument of intellect<br/> Is added unto evil will and power,<br/> No rampart can the people make against it.<br/></p>
				<p>His face appeared to me as long and large<br/> As is at Rome the pine-cone of Saint Peter’s,<br/> And in proportion were the other bones;<br/></p>
				<p>So that the margin, which an apron was<br/> Down from the middle, showed so much of him<br/> Above it, that to reach up to his hair<br/></p>
				<p>Three Frieslanders in vain had vaunted them;<br/> For I beheld thirty great palms of him<br/> Down from the place where man his mantle buckles.<br/></p>
				<p>“Raphael mai amech izabi almi,”<br/> Began to clamour the ferocious mouth,<br/> To which were not befitting sweeter psalms.<br/></p>
				<p>And unto him my Guide: “Soul idiotic,<br/> Keep to thy horn, and vent thyself with that,<br/> When wrath or other passion touches thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Search round thy neck, and thou wilt find the belt<br/> Which keeps it fastened, O bewildered soul,<br/> And see it, where it bars thy mighty breast.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to me: “He doth himself accuse;<br/> This one is Nimrod, by whose evil thought<br/> One language in the world is not still used.<br/></p>
				<p>Here let us leave him and not speak in vain;<br/> For even such to him is every language<br/> As his to others, which to none is known.”<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore a longer journey did we make,<br/> Turned to the left, and a crossbow-shot oft<br/> We found another far more fierce and large.<br/></p>
				<p>In binding him, who might the master be<br/> I cannot say; but he had pinioned close<br/> Behind the right arm, and in front the other,<br/></p>
				<p>With chains, that held him so begirt about<br/> From the neck down, that on the part uncovered<br/> It wound itself as far as the fifth gyre.<br/></p>
				<p>“This proud one wished to make experiment<br/> Of his own power against the Supreme Jove,”<br/> My Leader said, “whence he has such a guerdon.<br/></p>
				<p>Ephialtes is his name; he showed great prowess.<br/> What time the giants terrified the gods;<br/> The arms he wielded never more he moves.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “If possible, I should wish<br/> That of the measureless Briareus<br/> These eyes of mine might have experience.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he replied: “Thou shalt behold Antaeus<br/> Close by here, who can speak and is unbound,<br/> Who at the bottom of all crime shall place us.<br/></p>
				<p>Much farther yon is he whom thou wouldst see,<br/> And he is bound, and fashioned like to this one,<br/> Save that he seems in aspect more ferocious.”<br/></p>
				<p>There never was an earthquake of such might<br/> That it could shake a tower so violently,<br/> As Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.<br/></p>
				<p>Then was I more afraid of death than ever,<br/> For nothing more was needful than the fear,<br/> If I had not beheld the manacles.<br/></p>
				<p>Then we proceeded farther in advance,<br/> And to Antaeus came, who, full five ells<br/> Without the head, forth issued from the cavern.<br/></p>
				<p>“O thou, who in the valley fortunate,<br/> Which Scipio the heir of glory made,<br/> When Hannibal turned back with all his hosts,<br/></p>
				<p>Once brought’st a thousand lions for thy prey,<br/> And who, hadst thou been at the mighty war<br/> Among thy brothers, some it seems still think<br/></p>
				<p>The sons of Earth the victory would have gained:<br/> Place us below, nor be disdainful of it,<br/> There where the cold doth lock Cocytus up.<br/></p>
				<p>Make us not go to Tityus nor Typhoeus;<br/> This one can give of that which here is longed for;<br/> Therefore stoop down, and do not curl thy lip.<br/></p>
				<p>Still in the world can he restore thy fame;<br/> Because he lives, and still expects long life,<br/> If to itself Grace call him not untimely.”<br/></p>
				<p>So said the Master; and in haste the other<br/> His hands extended and took up my Guide⁠—<br/> Hands whose great pressure Hercules once felt.<br/></p>
				<p>Virgilius, when he felt himself embraced,<br/> Said unto me: “Draw nigh, that I may take thee;”<br/> Then of himself and me one bundle made.<br/></p>
				<p>As seems the Carisenda, to behold<br/> Beneath the leaning side, when goes a cloud<br/> Above it so that opposite it hangs;<br/></p>
				<p>Such did Antaeus seem to me, who stood<br/> Watching to see him stoop, and then it was<br/> I could have wished to go some other way.<br/></p>
				<p>But lightly in the abyss, which swallows up<br/> Judas with Lucifer, he put us down;<br/> Nor thus bowed downward made he there delay,<br/></p>
				<p>But, as a mast does in a ship, uprose.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-32" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Ninth Circle: the Frozen Lake of Cocytus.⁠—First Division, Caïna: Traitors to their Kindred.⁠—Camicion de’ Pazzi.⁠—Second Division, Antenora: Traitors to their Country.⁠—Bocca degli Abati and Buoso da Duera</span>
				</h3>
				<p>If I had rhymes both rough and stridulous,<br/> As were appropriate to the dismal hole<br/> Down upon which thrust all the other rocks,<br/></p>
				<p>I would press out the juice of my conception<br/> More fully; but because I have them not,<br/> Not without fear I bring myself to speak;<br/></p>
				<p>For ’tis no enterprise to take in jest,<br/> To sketch the bottom of all the universe,<br/> Nor for a tongue that cries Mamma and Babbo.<br/></p>
				<p>But may those Ladies help this verse of mine,<br/> Who helped Amphion in enclosing Thebes,<br/> That from the fact the word be not diverse.<br/></p>
				<p>O rabble ill-begotten above all,<br/> Who’re in the place to speak of which is hard,<br/> ’Twere better ye had here been sheep or goats!<br/></p>
				<p>When we were down within the darksome well,<br/> Beneath the giant’s feet, but lower far,<br/> And I was scanning still the lofty wall,<br/></p>
				<p>I heard it said to me: “Look how thou steppest!<br/> Take heed thou do not trample with thy feet<br/> The heads of the tired, miserable brothers!”<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat I turned me round, and saw before me<br/> And underfoot a lake, that from the frost<br/> The semblance had of glass, and not of water.<br/></p>
				<p>So thick a veil ne’er made upon its current<br/> In winter-time Danube in Austria,<br/> Nor there beneath the frigid sky the Don,<br/></p>
				<p>As there was here; so that if Tambernich<br/> Had fallen upon it, or Pietrapana,<br/> E’en at the edge ’twould not have given a creak.<br/></p>
				<p>And as to croak the frog doth place himself<br/> With muzzle out of water⁠—when is dreaming<br/> Of gleaning oftentimes the peasant-girl⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>Livid, as far down as where shame appears,<br/> Were the disconsolate shades within the ice,<br/> Setting their teeth unto the note of storks.<br/></p>
				<p>Each one his countenance held downward bent;<br/> From mouth the cold, from eyes the doleful heart<br/> Among them witness of itself procures.<br/></p>
				<p>When round about me somewhat I had looked,<br/> I downward turned me, and saw two so close,<br/> The hair upon their heads together mingled.<br/></p>
				<p>“Ye who so strain your breasts together, tell me,”<br/> I said, “who are you;” and they bent their necks,<br/> And when to me their faces they had lifted,<br/></p>
				<p>Their eyes, which first were only moist within,<br/> Gushed o’er the eyelids, and the frost congealed<br/> The tears between, and locked them up again.<br/></p>
				<p>Clamp never bound together wood with wood<br/> So strongly; whereat they, like two he-goats,<br/> Butted together, so much wrath o’ercame them.<br/></p>
				<p>And one, who had by reason of the cold<br/> Lost both his ears, still with his visage downward,<br/> Said: “Why dost thou so mirror thyself in us?<br/></p>
				<p>If thou desire to know who these two are,<br/> The valley whence Bisenzio descends<br/> Belonged to them and to their father Albert.<br/></p>
				<p>They from one body came, and all Caina<br/> Thou shalt search through, and shalt not find a shade<br/> More worthy to be fixed in gelatine;<br/></p>
				<p>Not he in whom were broken breast and shadow<br/> At one and the same blow by Arthur’s hand;<br/> Focaccia not; not he who me encumbers<br/></p>
				<p>So with his head I see no farther forward,<br/> And bore the name of Sassol Mascheroni;<br/> Well knowest thou who he was, if thou art Tuscan.<br/></p>
				<p>And that thou put me not to further speech,<br/> Know that I Camicion de’ Pazzi was,<br/> And wait Carlino to exonerate me.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then I beheld a thousand faces, made<br/> Purple with cold; whence o’er me comes a shudder,<br/> And evermore will come, at frozen ponds.<br/></p>
				<p>And while we were advancing tow’rds the middle,<br/> Where everything of weight unites together,<br/> And I was shivering in the eternal shade,<br/></p>
				<p>Whether ’twere will, or destiny, or chance,<br/> I know not; but in walking ‘mong the heads<br/> I struck my foot hard in the face of one.<br/></p>
				<p>Weeping he growled: “Why dost thou trample me?<br/> Unless thou comest to increase the vengeance<br/> of Montaperti, why dost thou molest me?”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “My Master, now wait here for me,<br/> That I through him may issue from a doubt;<br/> Then thou mayst hurry me, as thou shalt wish.”<br/></p>
				<p>The Leader stopped; and to that one I said<br/> Who was blaspheming vehemently still:<br/> “Who art thou, that thus reprehendest others?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Now who art thou, that goest through Antenora<br/> Smiting,” replied he, “other people’s cheeks,<br/> So that, if thou wert living, ’twere too much?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Living I am, and dear to thee it may be,”<br/> Was my response, “if thou demandest fame,<br/> That ‘mid the other notes thy name I place.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “For the reverse I long;<br/> Take thyself hence, and give me no more trouble;<br/> For ill thou knowest to flatter in this hollow.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then by the scalp behind I seized upon him,<br/> And said: “It must needs be thou name thyself,<br/> Or not a hair remain upon thee here.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he to me: “Though thou strip off my hair,<br/> I will not tell thee who I am, nor show thee,<br/> If on my head a thousand times thou fall.”<br/></p>
				<p>I had his hair in hand already twisted,<br/> And more than one shock of it had pulled out,<br/> He barking, with his eyes held firmly down,<br/></p>
				<p>When cried another: “What doth ail thee, Bocca?<br/> Is’t not enough to clatter with thy jaws,<br/> But thou must bark? what devil touches thee?”<br/></p>
				<p>“Now,” said I, “I care not to have thee speak,<br/> Accursed traitor; for unto thy shame<br/> I will report of thee veracious news.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Begone,” replied he, “and tell what thou wilt,<br/> But be not silent, if thou issue hence,<br/> Of him who had just now his tongue so prompt;<br/></p>
				<p>He weepeth here the silver of the French;<br/> ‘I saw,’ thus canst thou phrase it, ‘him of Duera<br/> There where the sinners stand out in the cold.’<br/></p>
				<p>If thou shouldst questioned be who else was there,<br/> Thou hast beside thee him of Beccaria,<br/> Of whom the gorget Florence slit asunder;<br/></p>
				<p>Gianni del Soldanier, I think, may be<br/> Yonder with Ganellon, and Tebaldello<br/> Who oped Faenza when the people slep.”<br/></p>
				<p>Already we had gone away from him,<br/> When I beheld two frozen in one hole,<br/> So that one head a hood was to the other;<br/></p>
				<p>And even as bread through hunger is devoured,<br/> The uppermost on the other set his teeth,<br/> There where the brain is to the nape united.<br/></p>
				<p>Not in another fashion Tydeus gnawed<br/> The temples of Menalippus in disdain,<br/> Than that one did the skull and the other things.<br/></p>
				<p>“O thou, who showest by such bestial sign<br/> Thy hatred against him whom thou art eating,<br/> Tell me the wherefore,” said I, “with this compact,<br/></p>
				<p>That if thou rightfully of him complain,<br/> In knowing who ye are, and his transgression,<br/> I in the world above repay thee for it,<br/></p>
				<p>If that wherewith I speak be not dried up.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-33" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Count Ugolino and the Archbishop Ruggieri.⁠—Third Division of the Ninth Circle, Ptolomæa: Traitors to their Friends.⁠—Friar Alberigo, Branco d’ Oria</span>
				</h3>
				<p>His mouth uplifted from his grim repast,<br/> That sinner, wiping it upon the hair<br/> Of the same head that he behind had wasted.<br/></p>
				<p>Then he began: “Thou wilt that I renew<br/> The desperate grief, which wrings my heart already<br/> To think of only, ere I speak of it;<br/></p>
				<p>But if my words be seed that may bear fruit<br/> Of infamy to the traitor whom I gnaw,<br/> Speaking and weeping shalt thou see together.<br/></p>
				<p>I know not who thou art, nor by what mode<br/> Thou hast come down here; but a Florentine<br/> Thou seemest to me truly, when I hear thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hast to know I was Count Ugolino,<br/> And this one was Ruggieri the Archbishop;<br/> Now I will tell thee why I am such a neighbour.<br/></p>
				<p>That, by effect of his malicious thoughts,<br/> Trusting in him I was made prisoner,<br/> And after put to death, I need not say;<br/></p>
				<p>But ne’ertheless what thou canst not have heard,<br/> That is to say, how cruel was my death,<br/> Hear shalt thou, and shalt know if he has wronged me.<br/></p>
				<p>A narrow perforation in the mew,<br/> Which bears because of me the title of Famine,<br/> And in which others still must be locked up,<br/></p>
				<p>Had shown me through its opening many moons<br/> Already, when I dreamed the evil dream<br/> Which of the future rent for me the veil.<br/></p>
				<p>This one appeared to me as lord and master,<br/> Hunting the wolf and whelps upon the mountain<br/> For which the Pisans cannot Lucca see.<br/></p>
				<p>With sleuth-hounds gaunt, and eager, and well trained,<br/> Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfianchi<br/> He had sent out before him to the front.<br/></p>
				<p>After brief course seemed unto me forespent<br/> The father and the sons, and with sharp tushes<br/> It seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped open.<br/></p>
				<p>When I before the morrow was awake,<br/> Moaning amid their sleep I heard my sons<br/> Who with me were, and asking after bread.<br/></p>
				<p>Cruel indeed art thou, if yet thou grieve not,<br/> Thinking of what my heart foreboded me,<br/> And weep’st thou not, what art thou wont to weep at?<br/></p>
				<p>They were awake now, and the hour drew nigh<br/> At which our food used to be brought to us,<br/> And through his dream was each one apprehensive;<br/></p>
				<p>And I heard locking up the under door<br/> Of the horrible tower; whereat without a word<br/> I gazed into the faces of my sons.<br/></p>
				<p>I wept not, I within so turned to stone;<br/> They wept; and darling little Anselm mine<br/> Said: ‘Thou dost gaze so, father, what doth ail thee?’<br/></p>
				<p>Still not a tear I shed, nor answer made<br/> All of that day, nor yet the night thereafter,<br/> Until another sun rose on the world.<br/></p>
				<p>As now a little glimmer made its way<br/> Into the dolorous prison, and I saw<br/> Upon four faces my own very aspect,<br/></p>
				<p>Both of my hands in agony I bit;<br/> And, thinking that I did it from desire<br/> Of eating, on a sudden they uprose,<br/></p>
				<p>And said they: ‘Father, much less pain ’twill give us<br/> If thou do eat of us; thyself didst clothe us<br/> With this poor flesh, and do thou strip it off.’<br/></p>
				<p>I calmed me then, not to make them more sad.<br/> That day we all were silent, and the next.<br/> Ah! obdurate earth, wherefore didst thou not open?<br/></p>
				<p>When we had come unto the fourth day, Gaddo<br/> Threw himself down outstretched before my feet,<br/> Saying, ‘My father, why dost thou not help me?’<br/></p>
				<p>And there he died; and, as thou seest me,<br/> I saw the three fall, one by one, between<br/> The fifth day and the sixth; whence I betook me,<br/></p>
				<p>Already blind, to groping over each,<br/> And three days called them after they were dead;<br/> Then hunger did what sorrow could not do.”<br/></p>
				<p>When he had said this, with his eyes distorted,<br/> The wretched skull resumed he with his teeth,<br/> Which, as a dog’s, upon the bone were strong.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah! Pisa, thou opprobrium of the people<br/> Of the fair land there where the ‘Si’ doth sound,<br/> Since slow to punish thee thy neighbours are,<br/></p>
				<p>Let the Capraia and Gorgona move,<br/> And make a hedge across the mouth of Arno<br/> That every person in thee it may drown!<br/></p>
				<p>For if Count Ugolino had the fame<br/> Of having in thy castles thee betrayed,<br/> Thou shouldst not on such cross have put his sons.<br/></p>
				<p>Guiltless of any crime, thou modern Thebes!<br/> Their youth made Uguccione and Brigata,<br/> And the other two my song doth name above!<br/></p>
				<p>We passed still farther onward, where the ice<br/> Another people ruggedly enswathes,<br/> Not downward turned, but all of them reversed.<br/></p>
				<p>Weeping itself there does not let them weep,<br/> And grief that finds a barrier in the eyes<br/> Turns itself inward to increase the anguish;<br/></p>
				<p>Because the earliest tears a cluster form,<br/> And, in the manner of a crystal visor,<br/> Fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow full.<br/></p>
				<p>And notwithstanding that, as in a callus,<br/> Because of cold all sensibility<br/> Its station had abandoned in my face,<br/></p>
				<p>Still it appeared to me I felt some wind;<br/> Whence I: “My Master, who sets this in motion?<br/> Is not below here every vapour quenched?”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he to me: “Full soon shalt thou be where<br/> Thine eye shall answer make to thee of this,<br/> Seeing the cause which raineth down the blast.”<br/></p>
				<p>And one of the wretches of the frozen crust<br/> Cried out to us: “O souls so merciless<br/> That the last post is given unto you,<br/></p>
				<p>Lift from mine eyes the rigid veils, that I<br/> May vent the sorrow which impregns my heart<br/> A little, e’er the weeping recongeal.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I to him: “If thou wouldst have me help thee<br/> Say who thou wast; and if I free thee not,<br/> May I go to the bottom of the ice.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then he replied: “I am Friar Alberigo;<br/> He am I of the fruit of the bad garden,<br/> Who here a date am getting for my fig.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O,” said I to him, “now art thou, too, dead?”<br/> And he to me: “How may my body fare<br/> Up in the world, no knowledge I possess.<br/></p>
				<p>Such an advantage has this Ptolomaea,<br/> That oftentimes the soul descendeth here<br/> Sooner than Atropos in motion sets it.<br/></p>
				<p>And, that thou mayest more willingly remove<br/> From off my countenance these glassy tears,<br/> Know that as soon as any soul betrays<br/></p>
				<p>As I have done, his body by a demon<br/> Is taken from him, who thereafter rules it,<br/> Until his time has wholly been revolved.<br/></p>
				<p>Itself down rushes into such a cistern;<br/> And still perchance above appears the body<br/> Of yonder shade, that winters here behind me.<br/></p>
				<p>This thou shouldst know, if thou hast just come down;<br/> It is Ser Branca d’ Oria, and many years<br/> Have passed away since he was thus locked up.”<br/></p>
				<p>“I think,” said I to him, “thou dost deceive me;<br/> For Branca d’ Oria is not dead as yet,<br/> And eats, and drinks, and sleeps, and puts on clothes.”<br/></p>
				<p>“In moat above,” said he, “of Malebranche,<br/> There where is boiling the tenacious pitch,<br/> As yet had Michel Zanche not arrived,<br/></p>
				<p>When this one left a devil in his stead<br/> In his own body and one near of kin,<br/> Who made together with him the betrayal.<br/></p>
				<p>But hitherward stretch out thy hand forthwith,<br/> Open mine eyes;”⁠—and open them I did not,<br/> And to be rude to him was courtesy.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah, Genoese! ye men at variance<br/> With every virtue, full of every vice<br/> Wherefore are ye not scattered from the world?<br/></p>
				<p>For with the vilest spirit of Romagna<br/> I found of you one such, who for his deeds<br/> In soul already in Cocytus bathes,<br/></p>
				<p>And still above in body seems alive!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="inferno-canto-34" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Fourth Division of the Ninth Circle, the Judecca: Traitors to their Lords and Benefactors.⁠—Lucifer, Judas Iscariot, Brutus and Cassius</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“ ‘Vexilla Regis prodeunt Inferni’<br/> Towards us; therefore look in front of thee,”<br/> My Master said, “if thou discernest him.”<br/></p>
				<p>As, when there breathes a heavy fog, or when<br/> Our hemisphere is darkening into night,<br/> Appears far off a mill the wind is turning,<br/></p>
				<p>Methought that such a building then I saw;<br/> And, for the wind, I drew myself behind<br/> My Guide, because there was no other shelter.<br/></p>
				<p>Now was I, and with fear in verse I put it,<br/> There where the shades were wholly covered up,<br/> And glimmered through like unto straws in glass.<br/></p>
				<p>Some prone are lying, others stand erect,<br/> This with the head, and that one with the soles;<br/> Another, bow-like, face to feet inverts.<br/></p>
				<p>When in advance so far we had proceeded,<br/> That it my Master pleased to show to me<br/> The creature who once had the beauteous semblance,<br/></p>
				<p>He from before me moved and made me stop,<br/> Saying: “Behold Dis, and behold the place<br/> Where thou with fortitude must arm thyself.”<br/></p>
				<p>How frozen I became and powerless then,<br/> Ask it not, Reader, for I write it not,<br/> Because all language would be insufficient.<br/></p>
				<p>I did not die, and I alive remained not;<br/> Think for thyself now, hast thou aught of wit,<br/> What I became, being of both deprived.<br/></p>
				<p>The Emperor of the kingdom dolorous<br/> From his mid-breast forth issued from the ice;<br/> And better with a giant I compare<br/></p>
				<p>Than do the giants with those arms of his;<br/> Consider now how great must be that whole,<br/> Which unto such a part conforms itself.<br/></p>
				<p>Were he as fair once, as he now is foul,<br/> And lifted up his brow against his Maker,<br/> Well may proceed from him all tribulation.<br/></p>
				<p>O, what a marvel it appeared to me,<br/> When I beheld three faces on his head!<br/> The one in front, and that vermilion was;<br/></p>
				<p>Two were the others, that were joined with this<br/> Above the middle part of either shoulder,<br/> And they were joined together at the crest;<br/></p>
				<p>And the right-hand one seemed ’twixt white and yellow;<br/> The left was such to look upon as those<br/> Who come from where the Nile falls valley-ward.<br/></p>
				<p>Underneath each came forth two mighty wings,<br/> Such as befitting were so great a bird;<br/> Sails of the sea I never saw so large.<br/></p>
				<p>No feathers had they, but as of a bat<br/> Their fashion was; and he was waving them,<br/> So that three winds proceeded forth therefrom.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereby Cocytus wholly was congealed.<br/> With six eyes did he weep, and down three chins<br/> Trickled the tear-drops and the bloody drivel.<br/></p>
				<p>At every mouth he with his teeth was crunching<br/> A sinner, in the manner of a brake,<br/> So that he three of them tormented thus.<br/></p>
				<p>To him in front the biting was as naught<br/> Unto the clawing, for sometimes the spine<br/> Utterly stripped of all the skin remained.<br/></p>
				<p>“That soul up there which has the greatest pain,”<br/> The Master said, “is Judas Iscariot;<br/> With head inside, he plies his legs without.<br/></p>
				<p>Of the two others, who head downward are,<br/> The one who hangs from the black jowl is Brutus;<br/> See how he writhes himself, and speaks no word.<br/></p>
				<p>And the other, who so stalwart seems, is Cassius.<br/> But night is reascending, and ’tis time<br/> That we depart, for we have seen the whole.”<br/></p>
				<p>As seemed him good, I clasped him round the neck,<br/> And he the vantage seized of time and place,<br/> And when the wings were opened wide apart,<br/></p>
				<p>He laid fast hold upon the shaggy sides;<br/> From fell to fell descended downward then<br/> Between the thick hair and the frozen crust.<br/></p>
				<p>When we were come to where the thigh revolves<br/> Exactly on the thickness of the haunch,<br/> The Guide, with labour and with hard-drawn breath,<br/></p>
				<p>Turned round his head where he had had his legs,<br/> And grappled to the hair, as one who mounts,<br/> So that to Hell I thought we were returning.<br/></p>
				<p>“Keep fast thy hold, for by such stairs as these,”<br/> The Master said, panting as one fatigued,<br/> “Must we perforce depart from so much evil.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then through the opening of a rock he issued,<br/> And down upon the margin seated me;<br/> Then tow’rds me he outstretched his wary step.<br/></p>
				<p>I lifted up mine eyes and thought to see<br/> Lucifer in the same way I had left him;<br/> And I beheld him upward hold his legs.<br/></p>
				<p>And if I then became disquieted,<br/> Let stolid people think who do not see<br/> What the point is beyond which I had passed.<br/></p>
				<p>“Rise up,” the Master said, “upon thy feet;<br/> The way is long, and difficult the road,<br/> And now the sun to middle-tierce returns.”<br/></p>
				<p>It was not any palace corridor<br/> There where we were, but dungeon natural,<br/> With floor uneven and unease of light.<br/></p>
				<p>“Ere from the abyss I tear myself away,<br/> My Master,” said I when I had arisen,<br/> “To draw me from an error speak a little;<br/></p>
				<p>Where is the ice? and how is this one fixed<br/> Thus upside down? and how in such short time<br/> From eve to morn has the sun made his transit?”<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Thou still imaginest<br/> Thou art beyond the centre, where I grasped<br/> The hair of the fell worm, who mines the world.<br/></p>
				<p>That side thou wast, so long as I descended;<br/> When round I turned me, thou didst pass the point<br/> To which things heavy draw from every side,<br/></p>
				<p>And now beneath the hemisphere art come<br/> Opposite that which overhangs the vast<br/> Dry-land, and ’neath whose cope was put to death<br/></p>
				<p>The Man who without sin was born and lived.<br/> Thou hast thy feet upon the little sphere<br/> Which makes the other face of the Judecca.<br/></p>
				<p>Here it is morn when it is evening there;<br/> And he who with his hair a stairway made us<br/> Still fixed remaineth as he was before.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon this side he fell down out of heaven;<br/> And all the land, that whilom here emerged,<br/> For fear of him made of the sea a veil,<br/></p>
				<p>And came to our hemisphere; and peradventure<br/> To flee from him, what on this side appears<br/> Left the place vacant here, and back recoiled.”<br/></p>
				<p>A place there is below, from Beelzebub<br/> As far receding as the tomb extends,<br/> Which not by sight is known, but by the sound<br/></p>
				<p>Of a small rivulet, that there descendeth<br/> Through chasm within the stone, which it has gnawed<br/> With course that winds about and slightly falls.<br/></p>
				<p>The Guide and I into that hidden road<br/> Now entered, to return to the bright world;<br/> And without care of having any rest<br/></p>
				<p>We mounted up, he first and I the second,<br/> Till I beheld through a round aperture<br/> Some of the beauteous things that Heaven doth bear;<br/></p>
				<p>Thence we came forth to rebehold the stars.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
