<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Paradiso</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="paradiso" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="paradiso-preface" epub:type="preface z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>I lift mine eyes, and all the windows blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With forms of Saints and holy men who died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here martyred and hereafter glorified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the great Rose upon its leaves displays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ’s Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With splendor upon splendor multiplied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Beatrice again at Dante’s side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the melodious bells among the spires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er all the house-tops and through heaven above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proclaim the elevation of the Host!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O star of morning and of liberty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O bringer of the light, whose splendor shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the darkness of the Apennines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forerunner of the day that is to be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voices of the city and the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The voices of the mountains and the pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Repeat thy song, till the familiar lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are footpaths for the thought of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Italy</span>!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fame is blown abroad from all the heights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through all the nations, and a sound is heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As of a mighty wind, and men devout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strangers of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Rome</span>, and the new proselytes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their own language hear thy wondrous word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many are amazed and many doubt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<h2 epub:type="title">Paradiso</h2>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Ascent to the First Heaven</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The glory of Him who moveth everything<br/> Doth penetrate the universe, and shine<br/> In one part more and in another less.<br/></p>
				<p>Within that heaven which most his light receives<br/> Was I, and things beheld which to repeat<br/> Nor knows, nor can, who from above descends;<br/></p>
				<p>Because in drawing near to its desire<br/> Our intellect ingulphs itself so far,<br/> That after it the memory cannot go.<br/></p>
				<p>Truly whatever of the holy realm<br/> I had the power to treasure in my mind<br/> Shall now become the subject of my song.<br/></p>
				<p>O good Apollo, for this last emprise<br/> Make of me such a vessel of thy power<br/> As giving the beloved laurel asks!<br/></p>
				<p>One summit of Parnassus hitherto<br/> Has been enough for me, but now with both<br/> I needs must enter the arena left.<br/></p>
				<p>Enter into my bosom, thou, and breathe<br/> As at the time when Marsyas thou didst draw<br/> Out of the scabbard of those limbs of his.<br/></p>
				<p>O power divine, lend’st thou thyself to me<br/> So that the shadow of the blessed realm<br/> Stamped in my brain I can make manifest,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou’lt see me come unto thy darling tree,<br/> And crown myself thereafter with those leaves<br/> Of which the theme and thou shall make me worthy.<br/></p>
				<p>So seldom, Father, do we gather them<br/> For triumph or of Caesar or of Poet,<br/> (The fault and shame of human inclinations,)<br/></p>
				<p>That the Peneian foliage should bring forth<br/> Joy to the joyous Delphic deity,<br/> When any one it makes to thirst for it.<br/></p>
				<p>A little spark is followed by great flame;<br/> Perchance with better voices after me<br/> Shall prayer be made that Cyrrha may respond!<br/></p>
				<p>To mortal men by passages diverse<br/> Uprises the world’s lamp; but by that one<br/> Which circles four uniteth with three crosses,<br/></p>
				<p>With better course and with a better star<br/> Conjoined it issues, and the mundane wax<br/> Tempers and stamps more after its own fashion.<br/></p>
				<p>Almost that passage had made morning there<br/> And evening here, and there was wholly white<br/> That hemisphere, and black the other part,<br/></p>
				<p>When Beatrice towards the left-hand side<br/> I saw turned round, and gazing at the sun;<br/> Never did eagle fasten so upon it!<br/></p>
				<p>And even as a second ray is wont<br/> To issue from the first and reascend,<br/> Like to a pilgrim who would fain return,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus of her action, through the eyes infused<br/> In my imagination, mine I made,<br/> And sunward fixed mine eyes beyond our wont.<br/></p>
				<p>There much is lawful which is here unlawful<br/> Unto our powers, by virtue of the place<br/> Made for the human species as its own.<br/></p>
				<p>Not long I bore it, nor so little while<br/> But I beheld it sparkle round about<br/> Like iron that comes molten from the fire;<br/></p>
				<p>And suddenly it seemed that day to day<br/> Was added, as if He who has the power<br/> Had with another sun the heaven adorned.<br/></p>
				<p>With eyes upon the everlasting wheels<br/> Stood Beatrice all intent, and I, on her<br/> Fixing my vision from above removed,<br/></p>
				<p>Such at her aspect inwardly became<br/> As Glaucus, tasting of the herb that made him<br/> Peer of the other gods beneath the sea.<br/></p>
				<p>To represent transhumanise in words<br/> Impossible were; the example, then, suffice<br/> Him for whom Grace the experience reserves.<br/></p>
				<p>If I was merely what of me thou newly<br/> Createdst, Love who governest the heaven,<br/> Thou knowest, who didst lift me with thy light!<br/></p>
				<p>When now the wheel, which thou dost make eternal<br/> Desiring thee, made me attentive to it<br/> By harmony thou dost modulate and measure,<br/></p>
				<p>Then seemed to me so much of heaven enkindled<br/> By the sun’s flame, that neither rain nor river<br/> E’er made a lake so widely spread abroad.<br/></p>
				<p>The newness of the sound and the great light<br/> Kindled in me a longing for their cause,<br/> Never before with such acuteness felt;<br/></p>
				<p>Whence she, who saw me as I saw myself,<br/> To quiet in me my perturbed mind,<br/> Opened her mouth, ere I did mine to ask,<br/></p>
				<p>And she began: “Thou makest thyself so dull<br/> With false imagining, that thou seest not<br/> What thou wouldst see if thou hadst shaken it off.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou art not upon earth, as thou believest;<br/> But lightning, fleeing its appropriate site,<br/> Ne’er ran as thou, who thitherward returnest.”<br/></p>
				<p>If of my former doubt I was divested<br/> By these brief little words more smiled than spoken,<br/> I in a new one was the more ensnared;<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “Already did I rest content<br/> From great amazement; but am now amazed<br/> In what way I transcend these bodies light.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whereupon she, after a pitying sigh,<br/> Her eyes directed tow’rds me with that look<br/> A mother casts on a delirious child;<br/></p>
				<p>And she began: “All things whate’er they be<br/> Have order among themselves, and this is form,<br/> That makes the universe resemble God.<br/></p>
				<p>Here do the higher creatures see the footprints<br/> Of the Eternal Power, which is the end<br/> Whereto is made the law already mentioned.<br/></p>
				<p>In the order that I speak of are inclined<br/> All natures, by their destinies diverse,<br/> More or less near unto their origin;<br/></p>
				<p>Hence they move onward unto ports diverse<br/> O’er the great sea of being; and each one<br/> With instinct given it which bears it on.<br/></p>
				<p>This bears away the fire towards the moon;<br/> This is in mortal hearts the motive power<br/> This binds together and unites the earth.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor only the created things that are<br/> Without intelligence this bow shoots forth,<br/> But those that have both intellect and love.<br/></p>
				<p>The Providence that regulates all this<br/> Makes with its light the heaven forever quiet,<br/> Wherein that turns which has the greatest haste.<br/></p>
				<p>And thither now, as to a site decreed,<br/> Bears us away the virtue of that cord<br/> Which aims its arrows at a joyous mark.<br/></p>
				<p>True is it, that as oftentimes the form<br/> Accords not with the intention of the art,<br/> Because in answering is matter deaf,<br/></p>
				<p>So likewise from this course doth deviate<br/> Sometimes the creature, who the power possesses,<br/> Though thus impelled, to swerve some other way,<br/></p>
				<p>(In the same wise as one may see the fire<br/> Fall from a cloud,) if the first impetus<br/> Earthward is wrested by some false delight.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou shouldst not wonder more, if well I judge,<br/> At thine ascent, than at a rivulet<br/> From some high mount descending to the lowland.<br/></p>
				<p>Marvel it would be in thee, if deprived<br/> Of hindrance, thou wert seated down below,<br/> As if on earth the living fire were quiet.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thereat she heavenward turned again her face.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The First Heaven, or that of the Moon, in which are seen the Spirits of those who, having taken Monastic Vows, were forced to violate them</span>
				</h3>
				<p>O Ye, who in some pretty little boat,<br/> Eager to listen, have been following<br/> Behind my ship, that singing sails along,<br/></p>
				<p>Turn back to look again upon your shores;<br/> Do not put out to sea, lest peradventure,<br/> In losing me, you might yourselves be lost.<br/></p>
				<p>The sea I sail has never yet been passed;<br/> Minerva breathes, and pilots me Apollo,<br/> And Muses nine point out to me the Bears.<br/></p>
				<p>Ye other few who have the neck uplifted<br/> Betimes to th’ bread of Angels upon which<br/> One liveth here and grows not sated by it,<br/></p>
				<p>Well may you launch upon the deep salt-sea<br/> Your vessel, keeping still my wake before you<br/> Upon the water that grows smooth again.<br/></p>
				<p>Those glorious ones who unto Colchos passed<br/> Were not so wonder-struck as you shall be,<br/> When Jason they beheld a ploughman made!<br/></p>
				<p>The con-created and perpetual thirst<br/> For the realm deiform did bear us on,<br/> As swift almost as ye the heavens behold.<br/></p>
				<p>Upward gazed Beatrice, and I at her;<br/> And in such space perchance as strikes a bolt<br/> And flies, and from the notch unlocks itself,<br/></p>
				<p>Arrived I saw me where a wondrous thing<br/> Drew to itself my sight; and therefore she<br/> From whom no care of mine could be concealed,<br/></p>
				<p>Towards me turning, blithe as beautiful,<br/> Said unto me: “Fix gratefully thy mind<br/> On God, who unto the first star has brought us.”<br/></p>
				<p>It seemed to me a cloud encompassed us,<br/> Luminous, dense, consolidate and bright<br/> As adamant on which the sun is striking.<br/></p>
				<p>Into itself did the eternal pearl<br/> Receive us, even as water doth receive<br/> A ray of light, remaining still unbroken.<br/></p>
				<p>If I was body, (and we here conceive not<br/> How one dimension tolerates another,<br/> Which needs must be if body enter body,)<br/></p>
				<p>More the desire should be enkindled in us<br/> That essence to behold, wherein is seen<br/> How God and our own nature were united.<br/></p>
				<p>There will be seen what we receive by faith,<br/> Not demonstrated, but self-evident<br/> In guise of the first truth that man believes.<br/></p>
				<p>I made reply: “Madonna, as devoutly<br/> As most I can do I give thanks to Him<br/> Who has removed me from the mortal world.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me what the dusky spots may be<br/> Upon this body, which below on earth<br/> Make people tell that fabulous tale of Cain?”<br/></p>
				<p>Somewhat she smiled; and then, “If the opinion<br/> Of mortals be erroneous,” she said,<br/> “Where’er the key of sense doth not unlock,<br/></p>
				<p>Certes, the shafts of wonder should not pierce thee<br/> Now, forasmuch as, following the senses,<br/> Thou seest that the reason has short wings.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me what thou think’st of it thyself.”<br/> And I: “What seems to us up here diverse,<br/> Is caused, I think, by bodies rare and dense.”<br/></p>
				<p>And she: “Right truly shalt thou see immersed<br/> In error thy belief, if well thou hearest<br/> The argument that I shall make against it.<br/></p>
				<p>Lights many the eighth sphere displays to you<br/> Which in their quality and quantity<br/> May noted be of aspects different.<br/></p>
				<p>If this were caused by rare and dense alone,<br/> One only virtue would there be in all<br/> Or more or less diffused, or equally.<br/></p>
				<p>Virtues diverse must be perforce the fruits<br/> Of formal principles; and these, save one,<br/> Of course would by thy reasoning be destroyed.<br/></p>
				<p>Besides, if rarity were of this dimness<br/> The cause thou askest, either through and through<br/> This planet thus attenuate were of matter,<br/></p>
				<p>Or else, as in a body is apportioned<br/> The fat and lean, so in like manner this<br/> Would in its volume interchange the leaves.<br/></p>
				<p>Were it the former, in the sun’s eclipse<br/> It would be manifest by the shining through<br/> Of light, as through aught tenuous interfused.<br/></p>
				<p>This is not so; hence we must scan the other,<br/> And if it chance the other I demolish,<br/> Then falsified will thy opinion be.<br/></p>
				<p>But if this rarity go not through and through,<br/> There needs must be a limit, beyond which<br/> Its contrary prevents the further passing,<br/></p>
				<p>And thence the foreign radiance is reflected,<br/> Even as a colour cometh back from glass,<br/> The which behind itself concealeth lead.<br/></p>
				<p>Now thou wilt say the sunbeam shows itself<br/> More dimly there than in the other parts,<br/> By being there reflected farther back.<br/></p>
				<p>From this reply experiment will free thee<br/> If e’er thou try it, which is wont to be<br/> The fountain to the rivers of your arts.<br/></p>
				<p>Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove<br/> Alike from thee, the other more remote<br/> Between the former two shall meet thine eyes.<br/></p>
				<p>Turned towards these, cause that behind thy back<br/> Be placed a light, illuming the three mirrors<br/> And coming back to thee by all reflected.<br/></p>
				<p>Though in its quantity be not so ample<br/> The image most remote, there shalt thou see<br/> How it perforce is equally resplendent.<br/></p>
				<p>Now, as beneath the touches of warm rays<br/> Naked the subject of the snow remains<br/> Both of its former colour and its cold,<br/></p>
				<p>Thee thus remaining in thy intellect,<br/> Will I inform with such a living light,<br/> That it shall tremble in its aspect to thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Within the heaven of the divine repose<br/> Revolves a body, in whose virtue lies<br/> The being of whatever it contains.<br/></p>
				<p>The following heaven, that has so many eyes,<br/> Divides this being by essences diverse,<br/> Distinguished from it, and by it contained.<br/></p>
				<p>The other spheres, by various differences,<br/> All the distinctions which they have within them<br/> Dispose unto their ends and their effects.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus do these organs of the world proceed,<br/> As thou perceivest now, from grade to grade;<br/> Since from above they take, and act beneath.<br/></p>
				<p>Observe me well, how through this place I come<br/> Unto the truth thou wishest, that hereafter<br/> Thou mayst alone know how to keep the ford<br/></p>
				<p>The power and motion of the holy spheres,<br/> As from the artisan the hammer’s craft,<br/> Forth from the blessed motors must proceed.<br/></p>
				<p>The heaven, which lights so manifold make fair,<br/> From the Intelligence profound, which turns it,<br/> The image takes, and makes of it a seal.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as the soul within your dust<br/> Through members different and accommodated<br/> To faculties diverse expands itself,<br/></p>
				<p>So likewise this Intelligence diffuses<br/> Its virtue multiplied among the stars.<br/> Itself revolving on its unity.<br/></p>
				<p>Virtue diverse doth a diverse alloyage<br/> Make with the precious body that it quickens,<br/> In which, as life in you, it is combined.<br/></p>
				<p>From the glad nature whence it is derived,<br/> The mingled virtue through the body shines,<br/> Even as gladness through the living pupil.<br/></p>
				<p>From this proceeds whate’er from light to light<br/> Appeareth different, not from dense and rare:<br/> This is the formal principle that produces,<br/></p>
				<p>According to its goodness, dark and bright.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Piccarda and Constance</span>
				</h3>
				<p>That Sun, which erst with love my bosom warmed,<br/> Of beauteous truth had unto me discovered,<br/> By proving and reproving, the sweet aspect.<br/></p>
				<p>And, that I might confess myself convinced<br/> And confident, so far as was befitting,<br/> I lifted more erect my head to speak.<br/></p>
				<p>But there appeared a vision, which withdrew me<br/> So close to it, in order to be seen,<br/> That my confession I remembered not.<br/></p>
				<p>Such as through polished and transparent glass,<br/> Or waters crystalline and undisturbed,<br/> But not so deep as that their bed be lost,<br/></p>
				<p>Come back again the outlines of our faces<br/> So feeble, that a pearl on forehead white<br/> Comes not less speedily unto our eyes;<br/></p>
				<p>Such saw I many faces prompt to speak,<br/> So that I ran in error opposite<br/> To that which kindled love ’twixt man and fountain.<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as I became aware of them,<br/> Esteeming them as mirrored semblances,<br/> To see of whom they were, mine eyes I turned,<br/></p>
				<p>And nothing saw, and once more turned them forward<br/> Direct into the light of my sweet Guide,<br/> Who smiling kindled in her holy eyes.<br/></p>
				<p>“Marvel thou not,” she said to me, “because<br/> I smile at this thy puerile conceit,<br/> Since on the truth it trusts not yet its foot,<br/></p>
				<p>But turns thee, as ’tis wont, on emptiness.<br/> True substances are these which thou beholdest,<br/> Here relegate for breaking of some vow.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore speak with them, listen and believe;<br/> For the true light, which giveth peace to them,<br/> Permits them not to turn from it their feet.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I unto the shade that seemed most wishful<br/> To speak directed me, and I began,<br/> As one whom too great eagerness bewilders:<br/></p>
				<p>“O well-created spirit, who in the rays<br/> Of life eternal dost the sweetness taste<br/> Which being untasted ne’er is comprehended,<br/></p>
				<p>Grateful ’twill be to me, if thou content me<br/> Both with thy name and with your destiny.”<br/> Whereat she promptly and with laughing eyes:<br/></p>
				<p>“Our charity doth never shut the doors<br/> Against a just desire, except as one<br/> Who wills that all her court be like herself.<br/></p>
				<p>I was a virgin sister in the world;<br/> And if thy mind doth contemplate me well,<br/> The being more fair will not conceal me from thee,<br/></p>
				<p>But thou shalt recognise I am Piccarda,<br/> Who, stationed here among these other blessed,<br/> Myself am blessed in the slowest sphere.<br/></p>
				<p>All our affections, that alone inflamed<br/> Are in the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,<br/> Rejoice at being of his order formed;<br/></p>
				<p>And this allotment, which appears so low,<br/> Therefore is given us, because our vows<br/> Have been neglected and in some part void.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I to her: “In your miraculous aspects<br/> There shines I know not what of the divine,<br/> Which doth transform you from our first conceptions.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore I was not swift in my remembrance;<br/> But what thou tellest me now aids me so,<br/> That the refiguring is easier to me.<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me, ye who in this place are happy,<br/> Are you desirous of a higher place,<br/> To see more or to make yourselves more friends?”<br/></p>
				<p>First with those other shades she smiled a little;<br/> Thereafter answered me so full of gladness,<br/> She seemed to burn in the first fire of love:<br/></p>
				<p>“Brother, our will is quieted by virtue<br/> Of charity, that makes us wish alone<br/> For what we have, nor gives us thirst for more.<br/></p>
				<p>If to be more exalted we aspired,<br/> Discordant would our aspirations be<br/> Unto the will of Him who here secludes us;<br/></p>
				<p>Which thou shalt see finds no place in these circles,<br/> If being in charity is needful here,<br/> And if thou lookest well into its nature;<br/></p>
				<p>Nay, ’tis essential to this blest existence<br/> To keep itself within the will divine,<br/> Whereby our very wishes are made one;<br/></p>
				<p>So that, as we are station above station<br/> Throughout this realm, to all the realm ’tis pleasing,<br/> As to the King, who makes his will our will.<br/></p>
				<p>And his will is our peace; this is the sea<br/> To which is moving onward whatsoever<br/> It doth create, and all that nature makes.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then it was clear to me how everywhere<br/> In heaven is Paradise, although the grace<br/> Of good supreme there rain not in one measure.<br/></p>
				<p>But as it comes to pass, if one food sates,<br/> And for another still remains the longing,<br/> We ask for this, and that decline with thanks,<br/></p>
				<p>E’en thus did I; with gesture and with word,<br/> To learn from her what was the web wherein<br/> She did not ply the shuttle to the end.<br/></p>
				<p>“A perfect life and merit high in-heaven<br/> A lady o’er us,” said she, “by whose rule<br/> Down in your world they vest and veil themselves,<br/></p>
				<p>That until death they may both watch and sleep<br/> Beside that Spouse who every vow accepts<br/> Which charity conformeth to his pleasure.<br/></p>
				<p>To follow her, in girlhood from the world<br/> I fled, and in her habit shut myself,<br/> And pledged me to the pathway of her sect.<br/></p>
				<p>Then men accustomed unto evil more<br/> Than unto good, from the sweet cloister tore me;<br/> God knows what afterward my life became.<br/></p>
				<p>This other splendour, which to thee reveals<br/> Itself on my right side, and is enkindled<br/> With all the illumination of our sphere,<br/></p>
				<p>What of myself I say applies to her;<br/> A nun was she, and likewise from her head<br/> Was ta’en the shadow of the sacred wimple.<br/></p>
				<p>But when she too was to the world returned<br/> Against her wishes and against good usage,<br/> Of the heart’s veil she never was divested.<br/></p>
				<p>Of great Costanza this is the effulgence,<br/> Who from the second wind of Suabia<br/> Brought forth the third and latest puissance.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus unto me she spake, and then began<br/> “Ave Maria” singing, and in singing<br/> Vanished, as through deep water something heavy.<br/></p>
				<p>My sight, that followed her as long a time<br/> As it was possible, when it had lost her<br/> Turned round unto the mark of more desire,<br/></p>
				<p>And wholly unto Beatrice reverted;<br/> But she such lightnings flashed into mine eyes,<br/> That at the first my sight endured it not;<br/></p>
				<p>And this in questioning more backward made me.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Questionings of the Soul and of Broken Vows</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Between two viands, equally removed<br/> And tempting, a free man would die of hunger<br/> Ere either he could bring unto his teeth.<br/></p>
				<p>So would a lamb between the ravenings<br/> Of two fierce wolves stand fearing both alike;<br/> And so would stand a dog between two does.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence, if I held my peace, myself I blame not,<br/> Impelled in equal measure by my doubts,<br/> Since it must be so, nor do I commend.<br/></p>
				<p>I held my peace; but my desire was painted<br/> Upon my face, and questioning with that<br/> More fervent far than by articulate speech.<br/></p>
				<p>Beatrice did as Daniel had done<br/> Relieving Nebuchadnezzar from the wrath<br/> Which rendered him unjustly merciless,<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “Well see I how attracteth thee<br/> One and the other wish, so that thy care<br/> Binds itself so that forth it does not breathe.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou arguest, if good will be permanent,<br/> The violence of others, for what reason<br/> Doth it decrease the measure of my merit?<br/></p>
				<p>Again for doubting furnish thee occasion<br/> Souls seeming to return unto the stars,<br/> According to the sentiment of Plato.<br/></p>
				<p>These are the questions which upon thy wish<br/> Are thrusting equally; and therefore first<br/> Will I treat that which hath the most of gall.<br/></p>
				<p>He of the Seraphim most absorbed in God,<br/> Moses, and Samuel, and whichever John<br/> Thou mayst select, I say, and even Mary,<br/></p>
				<p>Have not in any other heaven their seats,<br/> Than have those spirits that just appeared to thee,<br/> Nor of existence more or fewer years;<br/></p>
				<p>But all make beautiful the primal circle,<br/> And have sweet life in different degrees,<br/> By feeling more or less the eternal breath.<br/></p>
				<p>They showed themselves here, not because allotted<br/> This sphere has been to them, but to give sign<br/> Of the celestial which is least exalted.<br/></p>
				<p>To speak thus is adapted to your mind,<br/> Since only through the sense it apprehendeth<br/> What then it worthy makes of intellect.<br/></p>
				<p>On this account the Scripture condescends<br/> Unto your faculties, and feet and hands<br/> To God attributes, and means something else;<br/></p>
				<p>And Holy Church under an aspect human<br/> Gabriel and Michael represent to you,<br/> And him who made Tobias whole again.<br/></p>
				<p>That which Timaeus argues of the soul<br/> Doth not resemble that which here is seen,<br/> Because it seems that as he speaks he thinks.<br/></p>
				<p>He says the soul unto its star returns,<br/> Believing it to have been severed thence<br/> Whenever nature gave it as a form.<br/></p>
				<p>Perhaps his doctrine is of other guise<br/> Than the words sound, and possibly may be<br/> With meaning that is not to be derided.<br/></p>
				<p>If he doth mean that to these wheels return<br/> The honour of their influence and the blame,<br/> Perhaps his bow doth hit upon some truth.<br/></p>
				<p>This principle ill understood once warped<br/> The whole world nearly, till it went astray<br/> Invoking Jove and Mercury and Mars.<br/></p>
				<p>The other doubt which doth disquiet thee<br/> Less venom has, for its malevolence<br/> Could never lead thee otherwhere from me.<br/></p>
				<p>That as unjust our justice should appear<br/> In eyes of mortals, is an argument<br/> Of faith, and not of sin heretical.<br/></p>
				<p>But still, that your perception may be able<br/> To thoroughly penetrate this verity,<br/> As thou desirest, I will satisfy thee.<br/></p>
				<p>If it be violence when he who suffers<br/> Co-operates not with him who uses force,<br/> These souls were not on that account excused;<br/></p>
				<p>For will is never quenched unless it will,<br/> But operates as nature doth in fire<br/> If violence a thousand times distort it.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence, if it yieldeth more or less, it seconds<br/> The force; and these have done so, having power<br/> Of turning back unto the holy place.<br/></p>
				<p>If their will had been perfect, like to that<br/> Which Lawrence fast upon his gridiron held,<br/> And Mutius made severe to his own hand,<br/></p>
				<p>It would have urged them back along the road<br/> Whence they were dragged, as soon as they were free;<br/> But such a solid will is all too rare.<br/></p>
				<p>And by these words, if thou hast gathered them<br/> As thou shouldst do, the argument is refuted<br/> That would have still annoyed thee many times.<br/></p>
				<p>But now another passage runs across<br/> Before thine eyes, and such that by thyself<br/> Thou couldst not thread it ere thou wouldst be weary.<br/></p>
				<p>I have for certain put into thy mind<br/> That soul beatified could never lie,<br/> For it is near the primal Truth,<br/></p>
				<p>And then thou from Piccarda might’st have heard<br/> Costanza kept affection for the veil,<br/> So that she seemeth here to contradict me.<br/></p>
				<p>Many times, brother, has it come to pass,<br/> That, to escape from peril, with reluctance<br/> That has been done it was not right to do,<br/></p>
				<p>E’en as Alcmaeon (who, being by his father<br/> Thereto entreated, his own mother slew)<br/> Not to lose pity pitiless became.<br/></p>
				<p>At this point I desire thee to remember<br/> That force with will commingles, and they cause<br/> That the offences cannot be excused.<br/></p>
				<p>Will absolute consenteth not to evil;<br/> But in so far consenteth as it fears,<br/> If it refrain, to fall into more harm.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence when Piccarda uses this expression,<br/> She meaneth the will absolute, and I<br/> The other, so that both of us speak truth.”<br/></p>
				<p>Such was the flowing of the holy river<br/> That issued from the fount whence springs all truth;<br/> This put to rest my wishes one and all.<br/></p>
				<p>“O love of the first lover, O divine,”<br/> Said I forthwith, “whose speech inundates me<br/> And warms me so, it more and more revives me,<br/></p>
				<p>My own affection is not so profound<br/> As to suffice in rendering grace for grace;<br/> Let Him, who sees and can, thereto respond.<br/></p>
				<p>Well I perceive that never sated is<br/> Our intellect unless the Truth illume it,<br/> Beyond which nothing true expands itself.<br/></p>
				<p>It rests therein, as wild beast in his lair,<br/> When it attains it; and it can attain it;<br/> If not, then each desire would frustrate be.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore springs up, in fashion of a shoot,<br/> Doubt at the foot of truth; and this is nature,<br/> Which to the top from height to height impels us.<br/></p>
				<p>This doth invite me, this assurance give me<br/> With reverence, Lady, to inquire of you<br/> Another truth, which is obscure to me.<br/></p>
				<p>I wish to know if man can satisfy you<br/> For broken vows with other good deeds, so<br/> That in your balance they will not be light.”<br/></p>
				<p>Beatrice gazed upon me with her eyes<br/> Full of the sparks of love, and so divine,<br/> That, overcome my power, I turned my back<br/></p>
				<p>And almost lost myself with eyes downcast.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-5" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Compensations. Ascent to the Second Heaven, or that of Mercury, where are seen the Spirits of those who for the Love of Fame achieved great Deeds</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“If in the heat of love I flame upon thee<br/> Beyond the measure that on earth is seen,<br/> So that the valour of thine eyes I vanquish,<br/></p>
				<p>Marvel thou not thereat; for this proceeds<br/> From perfect sight, which as it apprehends<br/> To the good apprehended moves its feet.<br/></p>
				<p>Well I perceive how is already shining<br/> Into thine intellect the eternal light,<br/> That only seen enkindles always love;<br/></p>
				<p>And if some other thing your love seduce,<br/> ’Tis nothing but a vestige of the same,<br/> Ill understood, which there is shining through.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou fain wouldst know if with another service<br/> For broken vow can such return be made<br/> As to secure the soul from further claim.”<br/></p>
				<p>This Canto thus did Beatrice begin;<br/> And, as a man who breaks not off his speech,<br/> Continued thus her holy argument:<br/></p>
				<p>“The greatest gift that in his largess God<br/> Creating made, and unto his own goodness<br/> Nearest conformed, and that which he doth prize<br/></p>
				<p>Most highly, is the freedom of the will,<br/> Wherewith the creatures of intelligence<br/> Both all and only were and are endowed.<br/></p>
				<p>Now wilt thou see, if thence thou reasonest,<br/> The high worth of a vow, if it he made<br/> So that when thou consentest God consents:<br/></p>
				<p>For, closing between God and man the compact,<br/> A sacrifice is of this treasure made,<br/> Such as I say, and made by its own act.<br/></p>
				<p>What can be rendered then as compensation?<br/> Think’st thou to make good use of what thou’st offered,<br/> With gains ill gotten thou wouldst do good deed.<br/></p>
				<p>Now art thou certain of the greater point;<br/> But because Holy Church in this dispenses,<br/> Which seems against the truth which I have shown thee,<br/></p>
				<p>Behoves thee still to sit awhile at table,<br/> Because the solid food which thou hast taken<br/> Requireth further aid for thy digestion.<br/></p>
				<p>Open thy mind to that which I reveal,<br/> And fix it there within; for ’tis not knowledge,<br/> The having heard without retaining it.<br/></p>
				<p>In the essence of this sacrifice two things<br/> Convene together; and the one is that<br/> Of which ’tis made, the other is the agreement.<br/></p>
				<p>This last for evermore is cancelled not<br/> Unless complied with, and concerning this<br/> With such precision has above been spoken.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore it was enjoined upon the Hebrews<br/> To offer still, though sometimes what was offered<br/> Might be commuted, as thou ought’st to know.<br/></p>
				<p>The other, which is known to thee as matter,<br/> May well indeed be such that one errs not<br/> If it for other matter be exchanged.<br/></p>
				<p>But let none shift the burden on his shoulder<br/> At his arbitrament, without the turning<br/> Both of the white and of the yellow key;<br/></p>
				<p>And every permutation deem as foolish,<br/> If in the substitute the thing relinquished,<br/> As the four is in six, be not contained.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore whatever thing has so great weight<br/> In value that it drags down every balance,<br/> Cannot be satisfied with other spending.<br/></p>
				<p>Let mortals never take a vow in jest;<br/> Be faithful and not blind in doing that,<br/> As Jephthah was in his first offering,<br/></p>
				<p>Whom more beseemed to say, ‘I have done wrong,<br/> Than to do worse by keeping; and as foolish<br/> Thou the great leader of the Greeks wilt find,<br/></p>
				<p>Whence wept Iphigenia her fair face,<br/> And made for her both wise and simple weep,<br/> Who heard such kind of worship spoken of.’<br/></p>
				<p>Christians, be ye more serious in your movements;<br/> Be ye not like a feather at each wind,<br/> And think not every water washes you.<br/></p>
				<p>Ye have the Old and the New Testament,<br/> And the Pastor of the Church who guideth you<br/> Let this suffice you unto your salvation.<br/></p>
				<p>If evil appetite cry aught else to you,<br/> Be ye as men, and not as silly sheep,<br/> So that the Jew among you may not mock you.<br/></p>
				<p>Be ye not as the lamb that doth abandon<br/> Its mother’s milk, and frolicsome and simple<br/> Combats at its own pleasure with itself.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus Beatrice to me even as I write it;<br/> Then all desireful turned herself again<br/> To that part where the world is most alive.<br/></p>
				<p>Her silence and her change of countenance<br/> Silence imposed upon my eager mind,<br/> That had already in advance new questions;<br/></p>
				<p>And as an arrow that upon the mark<br/> Strikes ere the bowstring quiet hath become,<br/> So did we speed into the second realm.<br/></p>
				<p>My Lady there so joyful I beheld,<br/> As into the brightness of that heaven she entered,<br/> More luminous thereat the planet grew;<br/></p>
				<p>And if the star itself was changed and smiled,<br/> What became I, who by my nature am<br/> Exceeding mutable in every guise!<br/></p>
				<p>As, in a fish-pond which is pure and tranquil,<br/> The fishes draw to that which from without<br/> Comes in such fashion that their food they deem it;<br/></p>
				<p>So I beheld more than a thousand splendours<br/> Drawing towards us, and in each was heard:<br/> “Lo, this is she who shall increase our love.”<br/></p>
				<p>And as each one was coming unto us,<br/> Full of beatitude the shade was seen,<br/> By the effulgence clear that issued from it.<br/></p>
				<p>Think, Reader, if what here is just beginning<br/> No farther should proceed, how thou wouldst have<br/> An agonizing need of knowing more;<br/></p>
				<p>And of thyself thou’lt see how I from these<br/> Was in desire of hearing their conditions,<br/> As they unto mine eyes were manifest.<br/></p>
				<p>“O thou well-born, unto whom Grace concedes<br/> To see the thrones of the eternal triumph,<br/> Or ever yet the warfare be abandoned<br/></p>
				<p>With light that through the whole of heaven is spread<br/> Kindled are we, and hence if thou desirest<br/> To know of us, at thine own pleasure sate thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus by some one among those holy spirits<br/> Was spoken, and by Beatrice: “Speak, speak<br/> Securely, and believe them even as Gods.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Well I perceive how thou dost nest thyself<br/> In thine own light, and drawest it from thine eyes,<br/> Because they coruscate when thou dost smile,<br/></p>
				<p>But know not who thou art, nor why thou hast,<br/> Spirit august, thy station in the sphere<br/> That veils itself to men in alien rays.”<br/></p>
				<p>This said I in direction of the light<br/> Which first had spoken to me; whence it became<br/> By far more lucent than it was before.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the sun, that doth conceal himself<br/> By too much light, when heat has worn away<br/> The tempering influence of the vapours dense,<br/></p>
				<p>By greater rapture thus concealed itself<br/> In its own radiance the figure saintly,<br/> And thus close, close enfolded answered me<br/></p>
				<p>In fashion as the following Canto sings.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-6" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Justinian.⁠—The Roman Eagle.⁠—Romeo</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“After that Constantine the eagle turned<br/> Against the course of heaven, which it had followed<br/> Behind the ancient who Lavinia took,<br/></p>
				<p>Two hundred years and more the bird of God<br/> In the extreme of Europe held itself,<br/> Near to the mountains whence it issued first;<br/></p>
				<p>And under shadow of the sacred plumes<br/> It governed there the world from hand to hand,<br/> And, changing thus, upon mine own alighted.<br/></p>
				<p>Caesar I was, and am Justinian,<br/> Who, by the will of primal Love I feel,<br/> Took from the laws the useless and redundant;<br/></p>
				<p>And ere unto the work I was attent,<br/> One nature to exist in Christ, not more,<br/> Believed, and with such faith was I contented.<br/></p>
				<p>But blessed Agapetus, he who was<br/> The supreme pastor, to the faith sincere<br/> Pointed me out the way by words of his.<br/></p>
				<p>Him I believed, and what was his assertion<br/> I now see clearly, even as thou seest<br/> Each contradiction to be false and true.<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as with the Church I moved my feet,<br/> God in his grace it pleased with this high task<br/> To inspire me, and I gave me wholly to it,<br/></p>
				<p>And to my Belisarius I commended<br/> The arms, to which was heaven’s right hand so joined<br/> It was a signal that I should repose.<br/></p>
				<p>Now here to the first question terminates<br/> My answer; but the character thereof<br/> Constrains me to continue with a sequel,<br/></p>
				<p>In order that thou see with how great reason<br/> Men move against the standard sacrosanct,<br/> Both who appropriate and who oppose it.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold how great a power has made it worthy<br/> Of reverence, beginning from the hour<br/> When Pallas died to give it sovereignty.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou knowest it made in Alba its abode<br/> Three hundred years and upward, till at last<br/> The three to three fought for it yet again.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou knowest what it achieved from Sabine wrong<br/> Down to Lucretia’s sorrow, in seven kings<br/> O’ercoming round about the neighboring nations;<br/></p>
				<p>Thou knowest what it achieved, borne by the Romans<br/> Illustrious against Brennus, against Pyrrhus,<br/> Against the other princes and confederates.<br/></p>
				<p>Torquatus thence and Quinctius, who from locks<br/> Unkempt was named, Decii and Fabii,<br/> Received the fame I willingly embalm;<br/></p>
				<p>It struck to earth the pride of the Arabians,<br/> Who, following Hannibal, had passed across<br/> The Alpine ridges, Po, from which thou glidest;<br/></p>
				<p>Beneath it triumphed while they yet were young<br/> Pompey and Scipio, and to the hill<br/> Beneath which thou wast born it bitter seemed;<br/></p>
				<p>Then, near unto the time when heaven had willed<br/> To bring the whole world to its mood serene,<br/> Did Caesar by the will of Rome assume it.<br/></p>
				<p>What it achieved from Var unto the Rhine,<br/> Isere beheld and Saone, beheld the Seine,<br/> And every valley whence the Rhone is filled;<br/></p>
				<p>What it achieved when it had left Ravenna,<br/> And leaped the Rubicon, was such a flight<br/> That neither tongue nor pen could follow it.<br/></p>
				<p>Round towards Spain it wheeled its legions; then<br/> Towards Durazzo, and Pharsalia smote<br/> That to the calid Nile was felt the pain.<br/></p>
				<p>Antandros and the Simois, whence it started,<br/> It saw again, and there where Hector lies,<br/> And ill for Ptolemy then roused itself.<br/></p>
				<p>From thence it came like lightning upon Juba;<br/> Then wheeled itself again into your West,<br/> Where the Pompeian clarion it heard.<br/></p>
				<p>From what it wrought with the next standard-bearer<br/> Brutus and Cassius howl in Hell together,<br/> And Modena and Perugia dolent were;<br/></p>
				<p>Still doth the mournful Cleopatra weep<br/> Because thereof, who, fleeing from before it,<br/> Took from the adder sudden and black death.<br/></p>
				<p>With him it ran even to the Red Sea shore;<br/> With him it placed the world in so great peace,<br/> That unto Janus was his temple closed.<br/></p>
				<p>But what the standard that has made me speak<br/> Achieved before, and after should achieve<br/> Throughout the mortal realm that lies beneath it,<br/></p>
				<p>Becometh in appearance mean and dim,<br/> If in the hand of the third Caesar seen<br/> With eye unclouded and affection pure,<br/></p>
				<p>Because the living Justice that inspires me<br/> Granted it, in the hand of him I speak of,<br/> The glory of doing vengeance for its wrath.<br/></p>
				<p>Now here attend to what I answer thee;<br/> Later it ran with Titus to do vengeance<br/> Upon the vengeance of the ancient sin.<br/></p>
				<p>And when the tooth of Lombardy had bitten<br/> The Holy Church, then underneath its wings<br/> Did Charlemagne victorious succor her.<br/></p>
				<p>Now hast thou power to judge of such as those<br/> Whom I accused above, and of their crimes,<br/> Which are the cause of all your miseries.<br/></p>
				<p>To the public standard one the yellow lilies<br/> Opposes, the other claims it for a party,<br/> So that ’tis hard to see which sins the most.<br/></p>
				<p>Let, let the Ghibellines ply their handicraft<br/> Beneath some other standard; for this ever<br/> Ill follows he who it and justice parts.<br/></p>
				<p>And let not this new Charles e’er strike it down,<br/> He and his Guelfs, but let him fear the talons<br/> That from a nobler lion stripped the fell.<br/></p>
				<p>Already oftentimes the sons have wept<br/> The father’s crime; and let him not believe<br/> That God will change His scutcheon for the lilies.<br/></p>
				<p>This little planet doth adorn itself<br/> With the good spirits that have active been,<br/> That fame and honour might come after them;<br/></p>
				<p>And whensoever the desires mount thither,<br/> Thus deviating, must perforce the rays<br/> Of the true love less vividly mount upward.<br/></p>
				<p>But in commensuration of our wages<br/> With our desert is portion of our joy,<br/> Because we see them neither less nor greater.<br/></p>
				<p>Herein doth living Justice sweeten so<br/> Affection in us, that for evermore<br/> It cannot warp to any iniquity.<br/></p>
				<p>Voices diverse make up sweet melodies;<br/> So in this life of ours the seats diverse<br/> Render sweet harmony among these spheres;<br/></p>
				<p>And in the compass of this present pearl<br/> Shineth the sheen of Romeo, of whom<br/> The grand and beauteous work was ill rewarded.<br/></p>
				<p>But the Provencals who against him wrought,<br/> They have not laughed, and therefore ill goes he<br/> Who makes his hurt of the good deeds of others.<br/></p>
				<p>Four daughters, and each one of them a queen,<br/> Had Raymond Berenger, and this for him<br/> Did Romeo, a poor man and a pilgrim;<br/></p>
				<p>And then malicious words incited him<br/> To summon to a reckoning this just man,<br/> Who rendered to him seven and five for ten.<br/></p>
				<p>Then he departed poor and stricken in years,<br/> And if the world could know the heart he had,<br/> In begging bit by bit his livelihood,<br/></p>
				<p>Though much it laud him, it would laud him more.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-7" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Beatrice’s Discourse of the Incarnation, the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“Osanna sanctus Deus Sabaoth,<br/> Superillustrans claritate tua<br/> Felices ignes horum malahoth!”<br/></p>
				<p>In this wise, to his melody returning,<br/> This substance, upon which a double light<br/> Doubles itself, was seen by me to sing,<br/></p>
				<p>And to their dance this and the others moved,<br/> And in the manner of swift-hurrying sparks<br/> Veiled themselves from me with a sudden distance.<br/></p>
				<p>Doubting was I, and saying, “Tell her, tell her,”<br/> Within me, “tell her,” saying, “tell my Lady,”<br/> Who slakes my thirst with her sweet effluences;<br/></p>
				<p>And yet that reverence which doth lord it over<br/> The whole of me only by B and ICE,<br/> Bowed me again like unto one who drowses.<br/></p>
				<p>Short while did Beatrice endure me thus;<br/> And she began, lighting me with a smile<br/> Such as would make one happy in the fire:<br/></p>
				<p>“According to infallible advisement,<br/> After what manner a just vengeance justly<br/> Could be avenged has put thee upon thinking,<br/></p>
				<p>But I will speedily thy mind unloose;<br/> And do thou listen, for these words of mine<br/> Of a great doctrine will a present make thee.<br/></p>
				<p>By not enduring on the power that wills<br/> Curb for his good, that man who ne’er was born,<br/> Damning himself damned all his progeny;<br/></p>
				<p>Whereby the human species down below<br/> Lay sick for many centuries in great error,<br/> Till to descend it pleased the Word of God<br/></p>
				<p>To where the nature, which from its own Maker<br/> Estranged itself, he joined to him in person<br/> By the sole act of his eternal love.<br/></p>
				<p>Now unto what is said direct thy sight;<br/> This nature when united to its Maker,<br/> Such as created, was sincere and good;<br/></p>
				<p>But by itself alone was banished forth<br/> From Paradise, because it turned aside<br/> Out of the way of truth and of its life.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore the penalty the cross held out,<br/> If measured by the nature thus assumed,<br/> None ever yet with so great justice stung,<br/></p>
				<p>And none was ever of so great injustice,<br/> Considering who the Person was that suffered,<br/> Within whom such a nature was contracted.<br/></p>
				<p>From one act therefore issued things diverse;<br/> To God and to the Jews one death was pleasing;<br/> Earth trembled at it and the Heaven was opened.<br/></p>
				<p>It should no longer now seem difficult<br/> To thee, when it is said that a just vengeance<br/> By a just court was afterward avenged.<br/></p>
				<p>But now do I behold thy mind entangled<br/> From thought to thought within a knot, from which<br/> With great desire it waits to free itself.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou sayest, ‘Well discern I what I hear;<br/> But it is hidden from me why God willed<br/> For our redemption only this one mode.’<br/></p>
				<p>Buried remaineth, brother, this decree<br/> Unto the eyes of every one whose nature<br/> Is in the flame of love not yet adult.<br/></p>
				<p>Verily, inasmuch as at this mark<br/> One gazes long and little is discerned,<br/> Wherefore this mode was worthiest will I say.<br/></p>
				<p>Goodness Divine, which from itself doth spurn<br/> All envy, burning in itself so sparkles<br/> That the eternal beauties it unfolds.<br/></p>
				<p>Whate’er from this immediately distils<br/> Has afterwards no end, for ne’er removed<br/> Is its impression when it sets its seal.<br/></p>
				<p>Whate’er from this immediately rains down<br/> Is wholly free, because it is not subject<br/> Unto the influences of novel things.<br/></p>
				<p>The more conformed thereto, the more it pleases;<br/> For the blest ardour that irradiates all things<br/> In that most like itself is most vivacious.<br/></p>
				<p>With all of these things has advantaged been<br/> The human creature; and if one be wanting,<br/> From his nobility he needs must fall.<br/></p>
				<p>’Tis sin alone which doth disfranchise him,<br/> And render him unlike the Good Supreme,<br/> So that he little with its light is blanched,<br/></p>
				<p>And to his dignity no more returns,<br/> Unless he fill up where transgression empties<br/> With righteous pains for criminal delights.<br/></p>
				<p>Your nature when it sinned so utterly<br/> In its own seed, out of these dignities<br/> Even as out of Paradise was driven,<br/></p>
				<p>Nor could itself recover, if thou notest<br/> With nicest subtilty, by any way,<br/> Except by passing one of these two fords:<br/></p>
				<p>Either that God through clemency alone<br/> Had pardon granted, or that man himself<br/> Had satisfaction for his folly made.<br/></p>
				<p>Fix now thine eye deep into the abyss<br/> Of the eternal counsel, to my speech<br/> As far as may be fastened steadfastly!<br/></p>
				<p>Man in his limitations had not power<br/> To satisfy, not having power to sink<br/> In his humility obeying then,<br/></p>
				<p>Far as he disobeying thought to rise;<br/> And for this reason man has been from power<br/> Of satisfying by himself excluded.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore it God behoved in his own ways<br/> Man to restore unto his perfect life,<br/> I say in one, or else in both of them.<br/></p>
				<p>But since the action of the doer is<br/> So much more grateful, as it more presents<br/> The goodness of the heart from which it issues,<br/></p>
				<p>Goodness Divine, that doth imprint the world,<br/> Has been contented to proceed by each<br/> And all its ways to lift you up again;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor ’twixt the first day and the final night<br/> Such high and such magnificent proceeding<br/> By one or by the other was or shall be;<br/></p>
				<p>For God more bounteous was himself to give<br/> To make man able to uplift himself,<br/> Than if he only of himself had pardoned;<br/></p>
				<p>And all the other modes were insufficient<br/> For justice, were it not the Son of God<br/> Himself had humbled to become incarnate.<br/></p>
				<p>Now, to fill fully each desire of thine,<br/> Return I to elucidate one place,<br/> In order that thou there mayst see as I do.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou sayst: ‘I see the air, I see the fire,<br/> The water, and the earth, and all their mixtures<br/> Come to corruption, and short while endure;<br/></p>
				<p>And these things notwithstanding were created;’<br/> Therefore if that which I have said were true,<br/> They should have been secure against corruption.<br/></p>
				<p>The Angels, brother, and the land sincere<br/> In which thou art, created may be called<br/> Just as they are in their entire existence;<br/></p>
				<p>But all the elements which thou hast named,<br/> And all those things which out of them are made,<br/> By a created virtue are informed.<br/></p>
				<p>Created was the matter which they have;<br/> Created was the informing influence<br/> Within these stars that round about them go.<br/></p>
				<p>The soul of every brute and of the plants<br/> By its potential temperament attracts<br/> The ray and motion of the holy lights;<br/></p>
				<p>But your own life immediately inspires<br/> Supreme Beneficence, and enamours it<br/> So with herself, it evermore desires her.<br/></p>
				<p>And thou from this mayst argue furthermore<br/> Your resurrection, if thou think again<br/> How human flesh was fashioned at that time<br/></p>
				<p>When the first parents both of them were made.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-8" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Ascent to the Third Heaven, or that of Venus, where are seen the Spirits of Lovers.⁠—Charles Martel</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The world used in its peril to believe<br/> That the fair Cypria delirious love<br/> Rayed out, in the third epicycle turning;<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore not only unto her paid honour<br/> Of sacrifices and of votive cry<br/> The ancient nations in the ancient error,<br/></p>
				<p>But both Dione honoured they and Cupid,<br/> That as her mother, this one as her son,<br/> And said that he had sat in Dido’s lap;<br/></p>
				<p>And they from her, whence I beginning take,<br/> Took the denomination of the star<br/> That woos the sun, now following, now in front.<br/></p>
				<p>I was not ware of our ascending to it;<br/> But of our being in it gave full faith<br/> My Lady whom I saw more beauteous grow.<br/></p>
				<p>And as within a flame a spark is seen,<br/> And as within a voice a voice discerned,<br/> When one is steadfast, and one comes and goes,<br/></p>
				<p>Within that light beheld I other lamps<br/> Move in a circle, speeding more and less,<br/> Methinks in measure of their inward vision.<br/></p>
				<p>From a cold cloud descended never winds,<br/> Or visible or not, so rapidly<br/> They would not laggard and impeded seem<br/></p>
				<p>To any one who had those lights divine<br/> Seen come towards us, leaving the gyration<br/> Begun at first in the high Seraphim.<br/></p>
				<p>And behind those that most in front appeared<br/> Sounded “Osanna!” so that never since<br/> To hear again was I without desire.<br/></p>
				<p>Then unto us more nearly one approached,<br/> And it alone began: “We all are ready<br/> Unto thy pleasure, that thou joy in us.<br/></p>
				<p>We turn around with the celestial Princes,<br/> One gyre and one gyration and one thirst,<br/> To whom thou in the world of old didst say,<br/></p>
				<p>‘Ye who, intelligent, the third heaven are moving;’<br/> And are so full of love, to pleasure thee<br/> A little quiet will not be less sweet.”<br/></p>
				<p>After these eyes of mine themselves had offered<br/> Unto my Lady reverently, and she<br/> Content and certain of herself had made them,<br/></p>
				<p>Back to the light they turned, which so great promise<br/> Made of itself, and “Say, who art thou?” was<br/> My voice, imprinted with a great affection.<br/></p>
				<p>O how and how much I beheld it grow<br/> With the new joy that superadded was<br/> Unto its joys, as soon as I had spoken!<br/></p>
				<p>Thus changed, it said to me: “The world possessed me<br/> Short time below; and, if it had been more,<br/> Much evil will be which would not have been.<br/></p>
				<p>My gladness keepeth me concealed from thee,<br/> Which rayeth round about me, and doth hide me<br/> Like as a creature swathed in its own silk.<br/></p>
				<p>Much didst thou love me, and thou hadst good reason;<br/> For had I been below, I should have shown thee<br/> Somewhat beyond the foliage of my love.<br/></p>
				<p>That left-hand margin, which doth bathe itself<br/> In Rhone, when it is mingled with the Sorgue,<br/> Me for its lord awaited in due time,<br/></p>
				<p>And that horn of Ausonia, which is towned<br/> With Bari, with Gaeta and Catona,<br/> Whence Tronto and Verde in the sea disgorge.<br/></p>
				<p>Already flashed upon my brow the crown<br/> Of that dominion which the Danube waters<br/> After the German borders it abandons;<br/></p>
				<p>And beautiful Trinacria, that is murky<br/> ’Twixt Pachino and Peloro, (on the gulf<br/> Which greatest scath from Eurus doth receive,)<br/></p>
				<p>Not through Typhoeus, but through nascent sulphur,<br/> Would have awaited her own monarchs still,<br/> Through me from Charles descended and from Rudolph,<br/></p>
				<p>If evil lordship, that exasperates ever<br/> The subject populations, had not moved<br/> Palermo to the outcry of ‘Death! death!’<br/></p>
				<p>And if my brother could but this foresee,<br/> The greedy poverty of Catalonia<br/> Straight would he flee, that it might not molest him;<br/></p>
				<p>For verily ’tis needful to provide,<br/> Through him or other, so that on his bark<br/> Already freighted no more freight be placed.<br/></p>
				<p>His nature, which from liberal covetous<br/> Descended, such a soldiery would need<br/> As should not care for hoarding in a chest.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Because I do believe the lofty joy<br/> Thy speech infuses into me, my Lord,<br/> Where every good thing doth begin and end<br/></p>
				<p>Thou seest as I see it, the more grateful<br/> Is it to me; and this too hold I dear,<br/> That gazing upon God thou dost discern it.<br/></p>
				<p>Glad hast thou made me; so make clear to me,<br/> Since speaking thou hast stirred me up to doubt,<br/> How from sweet seed can bitter issue forth.”<br/></p>
				<p>This I to him; and he to me: “If I<br/> Can show to thee a truth, to what thou askest<br/> Thy face thou’lt hold as thou dost hold thy back.<br/></p>
				<p>The Good which all the realm thou art ascending<br/> Turns and contents, maketh its providence<br/> To be a power within these bodies vast;<br/></p>
				<p>And not alone the natures are foreseen<br/> Within the mind that in itself is perfect,<br/> But they together with their preservation.<br/></p>
				<p>For whatsoever thing this bow shoots forth<br/> Falls foreordained unto an end foreseen,<br/> Even as a shaft directed to its mark.<br/></p>
				<p>If that were not, the heaven which thou dost walk<br/> Would in such manner its effects produce,<br/> That they no longer would be arts, but ruins.<br/></p>
				<p>This cannot be, if the Intelligences<br/> That keep these stars in motion are not maimed,<br/> And maimed the First that has not made them perfect.<br/></p>
				<p>Wilt thou this truth have clearer made to thee?”<br/> And I: “Not so; for ’tis impossible<br/> That nature tire, I see, in what is needful.”<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he again: “Now say, would it be worse<br/> For men on earth were they not citizens?”<br/> “Yes,” I replied; “and here I ask no reason.”<br/></p>
				<p>“And can they be so, if below they live not<br/> Diversely unto offices diverse?<br/> No, if your master writeth well for you.”<br/></p>
				<p>So came he with deductions to this point;<br/> Then he concluded: “Therefore it behoves<br/> The roots of your effects to be diverse.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence one is Solon born, another Xerxes,<br/> Another Melchisedec, and another he<br/> Who, flying through the air, his son did lose.<br/></p>
				<p>Revolving Nature, which a signet is<br/> To mortal wax, doth practise well her art,<br/> But not one inn distinguish from another;<br/></p>
				<p>Thence happens it that Esau differeth<br/> In seed from Jacob; and Quirinus comes<br/> From sire so vile that he is given to Mars.<br/></p>
				<p>A generated nature its own way<br/> Would always make like its progenitors,<br/> If Providence divine were not triumphant.<br/></p>
				<p>Now that which was behind thee is before thee;<br/> But that thou know that I with thee am pleased,<br/> With a corollary will I mantle thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Evermore nature, if it fortune find<br/> Discordant to it, like each other seed<br/> Out of its region, maketh evil thrift;<br/></p>
				<p>And if the world below would fix its mind<br/> On the foundation which is laid by nature,<br/> Pursuing that, ’twould have the people good.<br/></p>
				<p>But you unto religion wrench aside<br/> Him who was born to gird him with the sword,<br/> And make a king of him who is for sermons;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore your footsteps wander from the road.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-9" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Cunizza, Folco of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Marseilles</span>, and Rahab</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Beautiful Clemence, after that thy Charles<br/> Had me enlightened, he narrated to me<br/> The treacheries his seed should undergo;<br/></p>
				<p>But said: “Be still and let the years roll round;”<br/> So I can only say, that lamentation<br/> Legitimate shall follow on your wrongs.<br/></p>
				<p>And of that holy light the life already<br/> Had to the Sun which fills it turned again,<br/> As to that good which for each thing sufficeth.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah, souls deceived, and creatures impious,<br/> Who from such good do turn away your hearts,<br/> Directing upon vanity your foreheads!<br/></p>
				<p>And now, behold, another of those splendours<br/> Approached me, and its will to pleasure me<br/> It signified by brightening outwardly.<br/></p>
				<p>The eyes of Beatrice, that fastened were<br/> Upon me, as before, of dear assent<br/> To my desire assurance gave to me.<br/></p>
				<p>“Ah, bring swift compensation to my wish,<br/> Thou blessed spirit,” I said, “and give me proof<br/> That what I think in thee I can reflect!”<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat the light, that still was new to me,<br/> Out of its depths, whence it before was singing,<br/> As one delighted to do good, continued:<br/></p>
				<p>“Within that region of the land depraved<br/> Of Italy, that lies between Rialto<br/> And fountain-heads of Brenta and of Piava,<br/></p>
				<p>Rises a hill, and mounts not very high,<br/> Wherefrom descended formerly a torch<br/> That made upon that region great assault.<br/></p>
				<p>Out of one root were born both I and it;<br/> Cunizza was I called, and here I shine<br/> Because the splendour of this star o’ercame me.<br/></p>
				<p>But gladly to myself the cause I pardon<br/> Of my allotment, and it does not grieve me;<br/> Which would perhaps seem strong unto your vulgar.<br/></p>
				<p>Of this so luculent and precious jewel,<br/> Which of our heaven is nearest unto me,<br/> Great fame remained; and ere it die away<br/></p>
				<p>This hundredth year shall yet quintupled be.<br/> See if man ought to make him excellent,<br/> So that another life the first may leave!<br/></p>
				<p>And thus thinks not the present multitude<br/> Shut in by Adige and Tagliamento,<br/> Nor yet for being scourged is penitent.<br/></p>
				<p>But soon ’twill be that Padua in the marsh<br/> Will change the water that Vicenza bathes,<br/> Because the folk are stubborn against duty;<br/></p>
				<p>And where the Sile and Cagnano join<br/> One lordeth it, and goes with lofty head,<br/> For catching whom e’en now the net is making.<br/></p>
				<p>Feltro moreover of her impious pastor<br/> Shall weep the crime, which shall so monstrous be<br/> That for the like none ever entered Malta.<br/></p>
				<p>Ample exceedingly would be the vat<br/> That of the Ferrarese could hold the blood,<br/> And weary who should weigh it ounce by ounce,<br/></p>
				<p>Of which this courteous priest shall make a gift<br/> To show himself a partisan; and such gifts<br/> Will to the living of the land conform.<br/></p>
				<p>Above us there are mirrors, Thrones you call them,<br/> From which shines out on us God Judicant,<br/> So that this utterance seems good to us.”<br/></p>
				<p>Here it was silent, and it had the semblance<br/> Of being turned elsewhither, by the wheel<br/> On which it entered as it was before.<br/></p>
				<p>The other joy, already known to me,<br/> Became a thing transplendent in my sight,<br/> As a fine ruby smitten by the sun.<br/></p>
				<p>Through joy effulgence is acquired above,<br/> As here a smile; but down below, the shade<br/> Outwardly darkens, as the mind is sad.<br/></p>
				<p>“God seeth all things, and in Him, blest spirit,<br/> Thy sight is,” said I, “so that never will<br/> Of his can possibly from thee be hidden;<br/></p>
				<p>Thy voice, then, that for ever makes the heavens<br/> Glad, with the singing of those holy fires<br/> Which of their six wings make themselves a cowl,<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore does it not satisfy my longings?<br/> Indeed, I would not wait thy questioning<br/> If I in thee were as thou art in me.”<br/></p>
				<p>“The greatest of the valleys where the water<br/> Expands itself,” forthwith its words began,<br/> “That sea excepted which the earth engarlands,<br/></p>
				<p>Between discordant shores against the sun<br/> Extends so far, that it meridian makes<br/> Where it was wont before to make the horizon.<br/></p>
				<p>I was a dweller on that valley’s shore<br/> ’Twixt Ebro and Magra that with journey short<br/> Doth from the Tuscan part the Genoese.<br/></p>
				<p>With the same sunset and same sunrise nearly<br/> Sit Buggia and the city whence I was,<br/> That with its blood once made the harbour hot.<br/></p>
				<p>Folco that people called me unto whom<br/> My name was known; and now with me this heaven<br/> Imprints itself, as I did once with it;<br/></p>
				<p>For more the daughter of Belus never burned,<br/> Offending both Sichaeus and Creusa,<br/> Than I, so long as it became my locks,<br/></p>
				<p>Nor yet that Rodophean, who deluded<br/> was by Demophoon, nor yet Alcides,<br/> When Iole he in his heart had locked.<br/></p>
				<p>Yet here is no repenting, but we smile,<br/> Not at the fault, which comes not back to mind,<br/> But at the power which ordered and foresaw.<br/></p>
				<p>Here we behold the art that doth adorn<br/> With such affection, and the good discover<br/> Whereby the world above turns that below.<br/></p>
				<p>But that thou wholly satisfied mayst bear<br/> Thy wishes hence which in this sphere are born,<br/> Still farther to proceed behoveth me.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou fain wouldst know who is within this light<br/> That here beside me thus is scintillating,<br/> Even as a sunbeam in the limpid water.<br/></p>
				<p>Then know thou, that within there is at rest<br/> Rahab, and being to our order joined,<br/> With her in its supremest grade ’tis sealed.<br/></p>
				<p>Into this heaven, where ends the shadowy cone<br/> Cast by your world, before all other souls<br/> First of Christ’s triumph was she taken up.<br/></p>
				<p>Full meet it was to leave her in some heaven,<br/> Even as a palm of the high victory<br/> Which he acquired with one palm and the other,<br/></p>
				<p>Because she favoured the first glorious deed<br/> Of Joshua upon the Holy Land,<br/> That little stirs the memory of the Pope.<br/></p>
				<p>Thy city, which an offshoot is of him<br/> Who first upon his Maker turned his back,<br/> And whose ambition is so sorely wept,<br/></p>
				<p>Brings forth and scatters the accursed flower<br/> Which both the sheep and lambs hath led astray<br/> Since it has turned the shepherd to a wolf.<br/></p>
				<p>For this the Evangel and the mighty Doctors<br/> Are derelict, and only the Decretals<br/> So studied that it shows upon their margins.<br/></p>
				<p>On this are Pope and Cardinals intent;<br/> Their meditations reach not Nazareth,<br/> There where his pinions Gabriel unfolded;<br/></p>
				<p>But Vatican and the other parts elect<br/> Of Rome, which have a cemetery been<br/> Unto the soldiery that followed Peter<br/></p>
				<p>Shall soon be free from this adultery.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-10" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fourth Heaven, or that of the Sun, where are seen the Spirits of Theologians and Fathers of the Church.⁠—<abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas Aquinas</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Looking into his Son with all the Love<br/> Which each of them eternally breathes forth,<br/> The Primal and unutterable Power<br/></p>
				<p>Whate’er before the mind or eye revolves<br/> With so much order made, there can be none<br/> Who this beholds without enjoying Him.<br/></p>
				<p>Lift up then, Reader, to the lofty wheels<br/> With me thy vision straight unto that part<br/> Where the one motion on the other strikes,<br/></p>
				<p>And there begin to contemplate with joy<br/> That Master’s art, who in himself so loves it<br/> That never doth his eye depart therefrom.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold how from that point goes branching off<br/> The oblique circle, which conveys the planets,<br/> To satisfy the world that calls upon them;<br/></p>
				<p>And if their pathway were not thus inflected,<br/> Much virtue in the heavens would be in vain,<br/> And almost every power below here dead.<br/></p>
				<p>If from the straight line distant more or less<br/> Were the departure, much would wanting be<br/> Above and underneath of mundane order.<br/></p>
				<p>Remain now, Reader, still upon thy bench,<br/> In thought pursuing that which is foretasted,<br/> If thou wouldst jocund be instead of weary.<br/></p>
				<p>I’ve set before thee; henceforth feed thyself,<br/> For to itself diverteth all my care<br/> That theme whereof I have been made the scribe.<br/></p>
				<p>The greatest of the ministers of nature,<br/> Who with the power of heaven the world imprints<br/> And measures with his light the time for us,<br/></p>
				<p>With that part which above is called to mind<br/> Conjoined, along the spirals was revolving,<br/> Where each time earlier he presents himself;<br/></p>
				<p>And I was with him; but of the ascending<br/> I was not conscious, saving as a man<br/> Of a first thought is conscious ere it come;<br/></p>
				<p>And Beatrice, she who is seen to pass<br/> From good to better, and so suddenly<br/> That not by time her action is expressed,<br/></p>
				<p>How lucent in herself must she have been!<br/> And what was in the sun, wherein I entered,<br/> Apparent not by colour but by light,<br/></p>
				<p>I, though I call on genius, art, and practice,<br/> Cannot so tell that it could be imagined;<br/> Believe one can, and let him long to see it.<br/></p>
				<p>And if our fantasies too lowly are<br/> For altitude so great, it is no marvel,<br/> Since o’er the sun was never eye could go.<br/></p>
				<p>Such in this place was the fourth family<br/> Of the high Father, who forever sates it,<br/> Showing how he breathes forth and how begets.<br/></p>
				<p>And Beatrice began: “Give thanks, give thanks<br/> Unto the Sun of Angels, who to this<br/> Sensible one has raised thee by his grace!”<br/></p>
				<p>Never was heart of mortal so disposed<br/> To worship, nor to give itself to God<br/> With all its gratitude was it so ready,<br/></p>
				<p>As at those words did I myself become;<br/> And all my love was so absorbed in Him,<br/> That in oblivion Beatrice was eclipsed.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor this displeased her; but she smiled at it<br/> So that the splendour of her laughing eyes<br/> My single mind on many things divided.<br/></p>
				<p>Lights many saw I, vivid and triumphant,<br/> Make us a centre and themselves a circle,<br/> More sweet in voice than luminous in aspect.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus girt about the daughter of Latona<br/> We sometimes see, when pregnant is the air,<br/> So that it holds the thread which makes her zone.<br/></p>
				<p>Within the court of Heaven, whence I return,<br/> Are many jewels found, so fair and precious<br/> They cannot be transported from the realm;<br/></p>
				<p>And of them was the singing of those lights.<br/> Who takes not wings that he may fly up thither,<br/> The tidings thence may from the dumb await!<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as singing thus those burning suns<br/> Had round about us whirled themselves three times,<br/> Like unto stars neighbouring the steadfast poles,<br/></p>
				<p>Ladies they seemed, not from the dance released,<br/> But who stop short, in silence listening<br/> Till they have gathered the new melody.<br/></p>
				<p>And within one I heard beginning: “When<br/> The radiance of grace, by which is kindled<br/> True love, and which thereafter grows by loving,<br/></p>
				<p>Within thee multiplied is so resplendent<br/> That it conducts thee upward by that stair,<br/> Where without reascending none descends,<br/></p>
				<p>Who should deny the wine out of his vial<br/> Unto thy thirst, in liberty were not<br/> Except as water which descends not seaward.<br/></p>
				<p>Fain wouldst thou know with what plants is enflowered<br/> This garland that encircles with delight<br/> The Lady fair who makes thee strong for heaven.<br/></p>
				<p>Of the lambs was I of the holy flock<br/> Which Dominic conducteth by a road<br/> Where well one fattens if he strayeth not.<br/></p>
				<p>He who is nearest to me on the right<br/> My brother and master was; and he Albertus<br/> Is of Cologne, I Thomas of Aquinum.<br/></p>
				<p>If thou of all the others wouldst be certain,<br/> Follow behind my speaking with thy sight<br/> Upward along the blessed garland turning.<br/></p>
				<p>That next effulgence issues from the smile<br/> Of Gratian, who assisted both the courts<br/> In such wise that it pleased in Paradise.<br/></p>
				<p>The other which near by adorns our choir<br/> That Peter was who, e’en as the poor widow,<br/> Offered his treasure unto Holy Church.<br/></p>
				<p>The fifth light, that among us is the fairest,<br/> Breathes forth from such a love, that all the world<br/> Below is greedy to learn tidings of it.<br/></p>
				<p>Within it is the lofty mind, where knowledge<br/> So deep was put, that, if the true be true,<br/> To see so much there never rose a second.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou seest next the lustre of that taper,<br/> Which in the flesh below looked most within<br/> The angelic nature and its ministry.<br/></p>
				<p>Within that other little light is smiling<br/> The advocate of the Christian centuries,<br/> Out of whose rhetoric Augustine was furnished.<br/></p>
				<p>Now if thou trainest thy mind’s eye along<br/> From light to light pursuant of my praise,<br/> With thirst already of the eighth thou waitest.<br/></p>
				<p>By seeing every good therein exults<br/> The sainted soul, which the fallacious world<br/> Makes manifest to him who listeneth well;<br/></p>
				<p>The body whence ’twas hunted forth is lying<br/> Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom<br/> And banishment it came unto this peace.<br/></p>
				<p>See farther onward flame the burning breath<br/> Of Isidore, of Beda, and of Richard<br/> Who was in contemplation more than man.<br/></p>
				<p>This, whence to me returneth thy regard,<br/> The light is of a spirit unto whom<br/> In his grave meditations death seemed slow.<br/></p>
				<p>It is the light eternal of Sigier,<br/> Who, reading lectures in the Street of Straw,<br/> Did syllogize invidious verities.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then, as a horologe that calleth us<br/> What time the Bride of God is rising up<br/> With matins to her Spouse that he may love her,<br/></p>
				<p>Wherein one part the other draws and urges,<br/> Ting! ting! resounding with so sweet a note,<br/> That swells with love the spirit well disposed,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus I beheld the glorious wheel move round,<br/> And render voice to voice, in modulation<br/> And sweetness that can not be comprehended,<br/></p>
				<p>Excepting there where joy is made eternal.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas Aquinas recounts the Life of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis</span>
				</h3>
				<p>O Thou insensate care of mortal men,<br/> How inconclusive are the syllogisms<br/> That make thee beat thy wings in downward flight!<br/></p>
				<p>One after laws and one to aphorisms<br/> Was going, and one following the priesthood,<br/> And one to reign by force or sophistry,<br/></p>
				<p>And one in theft, and one in state affairs,<br/> One in the pleasures of the flesh involved<br/> Wearied himself, one gave himself to ease;<br/></p>
				<p>When I, from all these things emancipate,<br/> With Beatrice above there in the Heavens<br/> With such exceeding glory was received!<br/></p>
				<p>When each one had returned unto that point<br/> Within the circle where it was before,<br/> It stood as in a candlestick a candle;<br/></p>
				<p>And from within the effulgence which at first<br/> Had spoken unto me, I heard begin<br/> Smiling while it more luminous became:<br/></p>
				<p>“Even as I am kindled in its ray,<br/> So, looking into the Eternal Light,<br/> The occasion of thy thoughts I apprehend.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou doubtest, and wouldst have me to resift<br/> In language so extended and so open<br/> My speech, that to thy sense it may be plain,<br/></p>
				<p>Where just before I said, ‘where well one fattens,’<br/> And where I said, ‘there never rose a second;’<br/> And here ’tis needful we distinguish well.<br/></p>
				<p>The Providence, which governeth the world<br/> With counsel, wherein all created vision<br/> Is vanquished ere it reach unto the bottom,<br/></p>
				<p>(So that towards her own Beloved might go<br/> The bride of Him who, uttering a loud cry,<br/> Espoused her with his consecrated blood,<br/></p>
				<p>Self-confident and unto Him more faithful,)<br/> Two Princes did ordain in her behoof,<br/> Which on this side and that might be her guide.<br/></p>
				<p>The one was all seraphical in ardour;<br/> The other by his wisdom upon earth<br/> A splendour was of light cherubical.<br/></p>
				<p>One will I speak of, for of both is spoken<br/> In praising one, whichever may be taken,<br/> Because unto one end their labours were.<br/></p>
				<p>Between Tupino and the stream that falls<br/> Down from the hill elect of blessed Ubald,<br/> A fertile slope of lofty mountain hangs,<br/></p>
				<p>From which Perugia feels the cold and heat<br/> Through Porta Sole, and behind it weep<br/> Gualdo and Nocera their grievous yoke.<br/></p>
				<p>From out that slope, there where it breaketh most<br/> Its steepness, rose upon the world a sun<br/> As this one does sometimes from out the Ganges;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore let him who speaketh of that place,<br/> Say not Ascesi, for he would say little,<br/> But Orient, if he properly would speak.<br/></p>
				<p>He was not yet far distant from his rising<br/> Before he had begun to make the earth<br/> Some comfort from his mighty virtue feel.<br/></p>
				<p>For he in youth his father’s wrath incurred<br/> For certain Dame, to whom, as unto death,<br/> The gate of pleasure no one doth unlock;<br/></p>
				<p>And was before his spiritual court<br/> ‘Et coram patre’ unto her united;<br/> Then day by day more fervently he loved her.<br/></p>
				<p>She, reft of her first husband, scorned, obscure,<br/> One thousand and one hundred years and more,<br/> Waited without a suitor till he came.<br/></p>
				<p>Naught it availed to hear, that with Amyclas<br/> Found her unmoved at sounding of his voice<br/> He who struck terror into all the world;<br/></p>
				<p>Naught it availed being constant and undaunted,<br/> So that, when Mary still remained below,<br/> She mounted up with Christ upon the cross.<br/></p>
				<p>But that too darkly I may not proceed,<br/> Francis and Poverty for these two lovers<br/> Take thou henceforward in my speech diffuse.<br/></p>
				<p>Their concord and their joyous semblances,<br/> The love, the wonder, and the sweet regard,<br/> They made to be the cause of holy thoughts;<br/></p>
				<p>So much so that the venerable Bernard<br/> First bared his feet, and after so great peace<br/> Ran, and, in running, thought himself too slow.<br/></p>
				<p>O wealth unknown! O veritable good!<br/> Giles bares his feet, and bares his feet Sylvester<br/> Behind the bridegroom, so doth please the bride!<br/></p>
				<p>Then goes his way that father and that master,<br/> He and his Lady and that family<br/> Which now was girding on the humble cord;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor cowardice of heart weighed down his brow<br/> At being son of Peter Bernardone,<br/> Nor for appearing marvellously scorned;<br/></p>
				<p>But regally his hard determination<br/> To Innocent he opened, and from him<br/> Received the primal seal upon his Order.<br/></p>
				<p>After the people mendicant increased<br/> Behind this man, whose admirable life<br/> Better in glory of the heavens were sung,<br/></p>
				<p>Incoronated with a second crown<br/> Was through Honorius by the Eternal Spirit<br/> The holy purpose of this Archimandrite.<br/></p>
				<p>And when he had, through thirst of martyrdom,<br/> In the proud presence of the Sultan preached<br/> Christ and the others who came after him,<br/></p>
				<p>And, finding for conversion too unripe<br/> The folk, and not to tarry there in vain,<br/> Returned to fruit of the Italic grass,<br/></p>
				<p>On the rude rock ’twixt Tiber and the Arno<br/> From Christ did he receive the final seal,<br/> Which during two whole years his members bore.<br/></p>
				<p>When He, who chose him unto so much good,<br/> Was pleased to draw him up to the reward<br/> That he had merited by being lowly,<br/></p>
				<p>Unto his friars, as to the rightful heirs,<br/> His most dear Lady did he recommend,<br/> And bade that they should love her faithfully;<br/></p>
				<p>And from her bosom the illustrious soul<br/> Wished to depart, returning to its realm,<br/> And for its body wished no other bier.<br/></p>
				<p>Think now what man was he, who was a fit<br/> Companion over the high seas to keep<br/> The bark of Peter to its proper bearings.<br/></p>
				<p>And this man was our Patriarch; hence whoever<br/> Doth follow him as he commands can see<br/> That he is laden with good merchandise.<br/></p>
				<p>But for new pasturage his flock has grown<br/> So greedy, that it is impossible<br/> They be not scattered over fields diverse;<br/></p>
				<p>And in proportion as his sheep remote<br/> And vagabond go farther off from him,<br/> More void of milk return they to the fold.<br/></p>
				<p>Verily some there are that fear a hurt,<br/> And keep close to the shepherd; but so few,<br/> That little cloth doth furnish forth their hoods.<br/></p>
				<p>Now if my utterance be not indistinct,<br/> If thine own hearing hath attentive been,<br/> If thou recall to mind what I have said,<br/></p>
				<p>In part contented shall thy wishes be;<br/> For thou shalt see the plant that’s chipped away,<br/> And the rebuke that lieth in the words,<br/></p>
				<p>‘Where well one fattens, if he strayeth not.’ ”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Buonaventura recounts the Life of <abbr>St.</abbr> Dominic</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Soon as the blessed flame had taken up<br/> The final word to give it utterance,<br/> Began the holy millstone to revolve,<br/></p>
				<p>And in its gyre had not turned wholly round,<br/> Before another in a ring enclosed it,<br/> And motion joined to motion, song to song;<br/></p>
				<p>Song that as greatly doth transcend our Muses,<br/> Our Sirens, in those dulcet clarions,<br/> As primal splendour that which is reflected.<br/></p>
				<p>And as are spanned athwart a tender cloud<br/> Two rainbows parallel and like in colour,<br/> When Juno to her handmaid gives command,<br/></p>
				<p>(The one without born of the one within,<br/> Like to the speaking of that vagrant one<br/> Whom love consumed as doth the sun the vapours,)<br/></p>
				<p>And make the people here, through covenant<br/> God set with Noah, presageful of the world<br/> That shall no more be covered with a flood,<br/></p>
				<p>In such wise of those sempiternal roses<br/> The garlands twain encompassed us about,<br/> And thus the outer to the inner answered.<br/></p>
				<p>After the dance, and other grand rejoicings,<br/> Both of the singing, and the flaming forth<br/> Effulgence with effulgence blithe and tender,<br/></p>
				<p>Together, at once, with one accord had stopped,<br/> (Even as the eyes, that, as volition moves them,<br/> Must needs together shut and lift themselves,)<br/></p>
				<p>Out of the heart of one of the new lights<br/> There came a voice, that needle to the star<br/> Made me appear in turning thitherward.<br/></p>
				<p>And it began: “The love that makes me fair<br/> Draws me to speak about the other leader,<br/> By whom so well is spoken here of mine.<br/></p>
				<p>’Tis right, where one is, to bring in the other,<br/> That, as they were united in their warfare,<br/> Together likewise may their glory shine.<br/></p>
				<p>The soldiery of Christ, which it had cost<br/> So dear to arm again, behind the standard<br/> Moved slow and doubtful and in numbers few,<br/></p>
				<p>When the Emperor who reigneth evermore<br/> Provided for the host that was in peril,<br/> Through grace alone and not that it was worthy;<br/></p>
				<p>And, as was said, he to his Bride brought succour<br/> With champions twain, at whose deed, at whose word<br/> The straggling people were together drawn.<br/></p>
				<p>Within that region where the sweet west wind<br/> Rises to open the new leaves, wherewith<br/> Europe is seen to clothe herself afresh,<br/></p>
				<p>Not far off from the beating of the waves,<br/> Behind which in his long career the sun<br/> Sometimes conceals himself from every man,<br/></p>
				<p>Is situate the fortunate Calahorra,<br/> Under protection of the mighty shield<br/> In which the Lion subject is and sovereign.<br/></p>
				<p>Therein was born the amorous paramour<br/> Of Christian Faith, the athlete consecrate,<br/> Kind to his own and cruel to his foes;<br/></p>
				<p>And when it was created was his mind<br/> Replete with such a living energy,<br/> That in his mother her it made prophetic.<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as the espousals were complete<br/> Between him and the Faith at holy font,<br/> Where they with mutual safety dowered each other,<br/></p>
				<p>The woman, who for him had given assent,<br/> Saw in a dream the admirable fruit<br/> That issue would from him and from his heirs;<br/></p>
				<p>And that he might be construed as he was,<br/> A spirit from this place went forth to name him<br/> With His possessive whose he wholly was.<br/></p>
				<p>Dominic was he called; and him I speak of<br/> Even as of the husbandman whom Christ<br/> Elected to his garden to assist him.<br/></p>
				<p>Envoy and servant sooth he seemed of Christ,<br/> For the first love made manifest in him<br/> Was the first counsel that was given by Christ.<br/></p>
				<p>Silent and wakeful many a time was he<br/> Discovered by his nurse upon the ground,<br/> As if he would have said, ‘For this I came.’<br/></p>
				<p>O thou his father, Felix verily!<br/> O thou his mother, verily Joanna,<br/> If this, interpreted, means as is said!<br/></p>
				<p>Not for the world which people toil for now<br/> In following Ostiense and Taddeo,<br/> But through his longing after the true manna,<br/></p>
				<p>He in short time became so great a teacher,<br/> That he began to go about the vineyard,<br/> Which fadeth soon, if faithless be the dresser;<br/></p>
				<p>And of the See, (that once was more benignant<br/> Unto the righteous poor, not through itself,<br/> But him who sits there and degenerates,)<br/></p>
				<p>Not to dispense or two or three for six,<br/> Not any fortune of first vacancy,<br/> ‘Non decimas quae sunt pauperum Dei,’<br/></p>
				<p>He asked for, but against the errant world<br/> Permission to do battle for the seed,<br/> Of which these four and twenty plants surround thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Then with the doctrine and the will together,<br/> With office apostolical he moved,<br/> Like torrent which some lofty vein out-presses;<br/></p>
				<p>And in among the shoots heretical<br/> His impetus with greater fury smote,<br/> Wherever the resistance was the greatest.<br/></p>
				<p>Of him were made thereafter divers runnels,<br/> Whereby the garden catholic is watered,<br/> So that more living its plantations stand.<br/></p>
				<p>If such the one wheel of the Biga was,<br/> In which the Holy Church itself defended<br/> And in the field its civic battle won,<br/></p>
				<p>Truly full manifest should be to thee<br/> The excellence of the other, unto whom<br/> Thomas so courteous was before my coming.<br/></p>
				<p>But still the orbit, which the highest part<br/> Of its circumference made, is derelict,<br/> So that the mould is where was once the crust.<br/></p>
				<p>His family, that had straight forward moved<br/> With feet upon his footprints, are turned round<br/> So that they set the point upon the heel.<br/></p>
				<p>And soon aware they will be of the harvest<br/> Of this bad husbandry, when shall the tares<br/> Complain the granary is taken from them.<br/></p>
				<p>Yet say I, he who searcheth leaf by leaf<br/> Our volume through, would still some page discover<br/> Where he could read, ‘I am as I am wont.’<br/></p>
				<p>’Twill not be from Casal nor Acquasparta,<br/> From whence come such unto the written word<br/> That one avoids it, and the other narrows.<br/></p>
				<p>Bonaventura of Bagnoregio’s life<br/> Am I, who always in great offices<br/> Postponed considerations sinister.<br/></p>
				<p>Here are Illuminato and Agostino,<br/> Who of the first barefooted beggars were<br/> That with the cord the friends of God became.<br/></p>
				<p>Hugh of Saint Victor is among them here,<br/> And Peter Mangiador, and Peter of Spain,<br/> Who down below in volumes twelve is shining;<br/></p>
				<p>Nathan the seer, and metropolitan<br/> Chrysostom, and Anselmus, and Donatus<br/> Who deigned to lay his hand to the first art;<br/></p>
				<p>Here is Rabanus, and beside me here<br/> Shines the Calabrian Abbot Joachim,<br/> He with the spirit of prophecy endowed.<br/></p>
				<p>To celebrate so great a paladin<br/> Have moved me the impassioned courtesy<br/> And the discreet discourses of Friar Thomas,<br/></p>
				<p>And with me they have moved this company.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-13" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Of the Wisdom of Solomon</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Let him imagine, who would well conceive<br/> What now I saw, and let him while I speak<br/> Retain the image as a steadfast rock,<br/></p>
				<p>The fifteen stars, that in their divers regions<br/> The sky enliven with a light so great<br/> That it transcends all clusters of the air;<br/></p>
				<p>Let him the Wain imagine unto which<br/> Our vault of heaven sufficeth night and day,<br/> So that in turning of its pole it fails not;<br/></p>
				<p>Let him the mouth imagine of the horn<br/> That in the point beginneth of the axis<br/> Round about which the primal wheel revolves⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>To have fashioned of themselves two signs in heaven,<br/> Like unto that which Minos’ daughter made,<br/> The moment when she felt the frost of death;<br/></p>
				<p>And one to have its rays within the other,<br/> And both to whirl themselves in such a manner<br/> That one should forward go, the other backward;<br/></p>
				<p>And he will have some shadowing forth of that<br/> True constellation and the double dance<br/> That circled round the point at which I was;<br/></p>
				<p>Because it is as much beyond our wont,<br/> As swifter than the motion of the Chiana<br/> Moveth the heaven that all the rest outspeeds.<br/></p>
				<p>There sang they neither Bacchus, nor Apollo,<br/> But in the divine nature Persons three,<br/> And in one person the divine and human.<br/></p>
				<p>The singing and the dance fulfilled their measure,<br/> And unto us those holy lights gave need,<br/> Growing in happiness from care to care.<br/></p>
				<p>Then broke the silence of those saints concordant<br/> The light in which the admirable life<br/> Of God’s own mendicant was told to me,<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “Now that one straw is trodden out<br/> Now that its seed is garnered up already,<br/> Sweet love invites me to thresh out the other.<br/></p>
				<p>Into that bosom, thou believest, whence<br/> Was drawn the rib to form the beauteous cheek<br/> Whose taste to all the world is costing dear,<br/></p>
				<p>And into that which, by the lance transfixed,<br/> Before and since, such satisfaction made<br/> That it weighs down the balance of all sin,<br/></p>
				<p>Whate’er of light it has to human nature<br/> Been lawful to possess was all infused<br/> By the same power that both of them created;<br/></p>
				<p>And hence at what I said above dost wonder,<br/> When I narrated that no second had<br/> The good which in the fifth light is enclosed.<br/></p>
				<p>Now ope thine eyes to what I answer thee,<br/> And thou shalt see thy creed and my discourse<br/> Fit in the truth as centre in a circle.<br/></p>
				<p>That which can die, and that which dieth not,<br/> Are nothing but the splendour of the idea<br/> Which by his love our Lord brings into being;<br/></p>
				<p>Because that living Light, which from its fount<br/> Effulgent flows, so that it disunites not<br/> From Him nor from the Love in them intrined,<br/></p>
				<p>Through its own goodness reunites its rays<br/> In nine subsistences, as in a mirror,<br/> Itself eternally remaining One.<br/></p>
				<p>Thence it descends to the last potencies,<br/> Downward from act to act becoming such<br/> That only brief contingencies it makes;<br/></p>
				<p>And these contingencies I hold to be<br/> Things generated, which the heaven produces<br/> By its own motion, with seed and without.<br/></p>
				<p>Neither their wax, nor that which tempers it,<br/> Remains immutable, and hence beneath<br/> The ideal signet more and less shines through;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore it happens, that the selfsame tree<br/> After its kind bears worse and better fruit,<br/> And ye are born with characters diverse.<br/></p>
				<p>If in perfection tempered were the wax,<br/> And were the heaven in its supremest virtue,<br/> The brilliance of the seal would all appear;<br/></p>
				<p>But nature gives it evermore deficient,<br/> In the like manner working as the artist,<br/> Who has the skill of art and hand that trembles.<br/></p>
				<p>If then the fervent Love, the Vision clear,<br/> Of primal Virtue do dispose and seal,<br/> Perfection absolute is there acquired.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus was of old the earth created worthy<br/> Of all and every animal perfection;<br/> And thus the Virgin was impregnate made;<br/></p>
				<p>So that thine own opinion I commend,<br/> That human nature never yet has been,<br/> Nor will be, what it was in those two persons.<br/></p>
				<p>Now if no farther forth I should proceed,<br/> ‘Then in what way was he without a peer?’<br/> Would be the first beginning of thy words.<br/></p>
				<p>But, that may well appear what now appears not,<br/> Think who he was, and what occasion moved him<br/> To make request, when it was told him, ‘Ask.’<br/></p>
				<p>I’ve not so spoken that thou canst not see<br/> Clearly he was a king who asked for wisdom,<br/> That he might be sufficiently a king;<br/></p>
				<p>’Twas not to know the number in which are<br/> The motors here above, or if ‘necesse’<br/> With a contingent e’er ‘necesse’ make,<br/></p>
				<p>‘Non si est dare primum motum esse,’<br/> Or if in semicircle can be made<br/> Triangle so that it have no right angle.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence, if thou notest this and what I said,<br/> A regal prudence is that peerless seeing<br/> In which the shaft of my intention strikes.<br/></p>
				<p>And if on ‘rose’ thou turnest thy clear eyes,<br/> Thou’lt see that it has reference alone<br/> To kings who’re many, and the good are rare.<br/></p>
				<p>With this distinction take thou what I said,<br/> And thus it can consist with thy belief<br/> Of the first father and of our Delight.<br/></p>
				<p>And lead shall this be always to thy feet,<br/> To make thee, like a weary man, move slowly<br/> Both to the Yes and No thou seest not;<br/></p>
				<p>For very low among the fools is he<br/> Who affirms without distinction, or denies,<br/> As well in one as in the other case;<br/></p>
				<p>Because it happens that full often bends<br/> Current opinion in the false direction,<br/> And then the feelings bind the intellect.<br/></p>
				<p>Far more than uselessly he leaves the shore,<br/> (Since he returneth not the same he went,)<br/> Who fishes for the truth, and has no skill;<br/></p>
				<p>And in the world proofs manifest thereof<br/> Parmenides, Melissus, Brissus are,<br/> And many who went on and knew not whither;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did Sabellius, Arius, and those fools<br/> Who have been even as swords unto the Scriptures<br/> In rendering distorted their straight faces.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor yet shall people be too confident<br/> In judging, even as he is who doth count<br/> The corn in field or ever it be ripe.<br/></p>
				<p>For I have seen all winter long the thorn<br/> First show itself intractable and fierce,<br/> And after bear the rose upon its top;<br/></p>
				<p>And I have seen a ship direct and swift<br/> Run o’er the sea throughout its course entire,<br/> To perish at the harbour’s mouth at last.<br/></p>
				<p>Let not Dame Bertha nor Ser Martin think,<br/> Seeing one steal, another offering make,<br/> To see them in the arbitrament divine;<br/></p>
				<p>For one may rise, and fall the other may.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-14" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fifth Heaven, or that of Mars, where are seen the Spirits of Martyrs, and of Crusaders who died fighting for the true Faith.⁠—The Celestial Cross</span>
				</h3>
				<p>From centre unto rim, from rim to centre,<br/> In a round vase the water moves itself,<br/> As from without ’tis struck or from within.<br/></p>
				<p>Into my mind upon a sudden dropped<br/> What I am saying, at the moment when<br/> Silent became the glorious life of Thomas,<br/></p>
				<p>Because of the resemblance that was born<br/> Of his discourse and that of Beatrice,<br/> Whom, after him, it pleased thus to begin:<br/></p>
				<p>“This man has need (and does not tell you so,<br/> Nor with the voice, nor even in his thought)<br/> Of going to the root of one truth more.<br/></p>
				<p>Declare unto him if the light wherewith<br/> Blossoms your substance shall remain with you<br/> Eternally the same that it is now;<br/></p>
				<p>And if it do remain, say in what manner,<br/> After ye are again made visible,<br/> It can be that it injure not your sight.”<br/></p>
				<p>As by a greater gladness urged and drawn<br/> They who are dancing in a ring sometimes<br/> Uplift their voices and their motions quicken;<br/></p>
				<p>So, at that orison devout and prompt,<br/> The holy circles a new joy displayed<br/> In their revolving and their wondrous song.<br/></p>
				<p>Whoso lamenteth him that here we die<br/> That we may live above, has never there<br/> Seen the refreshment of the eternal rain.<br/></p>
				<p>The One and Two and Three who ever liveth,<br/> And reigneth ever in Three and Two and One,<br/> Not circumscribed and all things circumscribing,<br/></p>
				<p>Three several times was chanted by each one<br/> Among those spirits, with such melody<br/> That for all merit it were just reward;<br/></p>
				<p>And, in the lustre most divine of all<br/> The lesser ring, I heard a modest voice,<br/> Such as perhaps the Angel’s was to Mary,<br/></p>
				<p>Answer: “As long as the festivity<br/> Of Paradise shall be, so long our love<br/> Shall radiate round about us such a vesture.<br/></p>
				<p>Its brightness is proportioned to the ardour,<br/> The ardour to the vision; and the vision<br/> Equals what grace it has above its worth.<br/></p>
				<p>When, glorious and sanctified, our flesh<br/> Is reassumed, then shall our persons be<br/> More pleasing by their being all complete;<br/></p>
				<p>For will increase whate’er bestows on us<br/> Of light gratuitous the Good Supreme,<br/> Light which enables us to look on Him;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore the vision must perforce increase,<br/> Increase the ardour which from that is kindled,<br/> Increase the radiance which from this proceeds.<br/></p>
				<p>But even as a coal that sends forth flame,<br/> And by its vivid whiteness overpowers it<br/> So that its own appearance it maintains,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus the effulgence that surrounds us now<br/> Shall be o’erpowered in aspect by the flesh,<br/> Which still to-day the earth doth cover up;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor can so great a splendour weary us,<br/> For strong will be the organs of the body<br/> To everything which hath the power to please us.”<br/></p>
				<p>So sudden and alert appeared to me<br/> Both one and the other choir to say Amen,<br/> That well they showed desire for their dead bodies;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor sole for them perhaps, but for the mothers,<br/> The fathers, and the rest who had been dear<br/> Or ever they became eternal flames.<br/></p>
				<p>And lo! all round about of equal brightness<br/> Arose a lustre over what was there,<br/> Like an horizon that is clearing up.<br/></p>
				<p>And as at rise of early eve begin<br/> Along the welkin new appearances,<br/> So that the sight seems real and unreal,<br/></p>
				<p>It seemed to me that new subsistences<br/> Began there to be seen, and make a circle<br/> Outside the other two circumferences.<br/></p>
				<p>O very sparkling of the Holy Spirit,<br/> How sudden and incandescent it became<br/> Unto mine eyes, that vanquished bore it not!<br/></p>
				<p>But Beatrice so beautiful and smiling<br/> Appeared to me, that with the other sights<br/> That followed not my memory I must leave her.<br/></p>
				<p>Then to uplift themselves mine eyes resumed<br/> The power, and I beheld myself translated<br/> To higher salvation with my Lady only.<br/></p>
				<p>Well was I ware that I was more uplifted<br/> By the enkindled smiling of the star,<br/> That seemed to me more ruddy than its wont.<br/></p>
				<p>With all my heart, and in that dialect<br/> Which is the same in all, such holocaust<br/> To God I made as the new grace beseemed;<br/></p>
				<p>And not yet from my bosom was exhausted<br/> The ardour of sacrifice, before I knew<br/> This offering was accepted and auspicious;<br/></p>
				<p>For with so great a lustre and so red<br/> Splendours appeared to me in twofold rays,<br/> I said: “O Helios who dost so adorn them!”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as distinct with less and greater lights<br/> Glimmers between the two poles of the world<br/> The Galaxy that maketh wise men doubt,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus constellated in the depths of Mars,<br/> Those rays described the venerable sign<br/> That quadrants joining in a circle make.<br/></p>
				<p>Here doth my memory overcome my genius;<br/> For on that cross as levin gleamed forth Christ,<br/> So that I cannot find ensample worthy;<br/></p>
				<p>But he who takes his cross and follows Christ<br/> Again will pardon me what I omit,<br/> Seeing in that aurora lighten Christ.<br/></p>
				<p>From horn to horn, and ’twixt the top and base,<br/> Lights were in motion, brightly scintillating<br/> As they together met and passed each other;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus level and aslant and swift and slow<br/> We here behold, renewing still the sight,<br/> The particles of bodies long and short,<br/></p>
				<p>Across the sunbeam move, wherewith is listed<br/> Sometimes the shade, which for their own defence<br/> People with cunning and with art contrive.<br/></p>
				<p>And as a lute and harp, accordant strung<br/> With many strings, a dulcet tinkling make<br/> To him by whom the notes are not distinguished,<br/></p>
				<p>So from the lights that there to me appeared<br/> Upgathered through the cross a melody,<br/> Which rapt me, not distinguishing the hymn.<br/></p>
				<p>Well was I ware it was of lofty laud,<br/> Because there came to me, “Arise and conquer!”<br/> As unto him who hears and comprehends not.<br/></p>
				<p>So much enamoured I became therewith,<br/> That until then there was not anything<br/> That e’er had fettered me with such sweet bonds.<br/></p>
				<p>Perhaps my word appears somewhat too bold,<br/> Postponing the delight of those fair eyes,<br/> Into which gazing my desire has rest;<br/></p>
				<p>But who bethinks him that the living seals<br/> Of every beauty grow in power ascending,<br/> And that I there had not turned round to those,<br/></p>
				<p>Can me excuse, if I myself accuse<br/> To excuse myself, and see that I speak truly:<br/> For here the holy joy is not disclosed,<br/></p>
				<p>Because ascending it becomes more pure.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-15" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Cacciaguida.⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:place">Florence</span> in the Olden Time</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A will benign, in which reveals itself<br/> Ever the love that righteously inspires,<br/> As in the iniquitous, cupidity,<br/></p>
				<p>Silence imposed upon that dulcet lyre,<br/> And quieted the consecrated chords,<br/> That Heaven’s right hand doth tighten and relax.<br/></p>
				<p>How unto just entreaties shall be deaf<br/> Those substances, which, to give me desire<br/> Of praying them, with one accord grew silent?<br/></p>
				<p>’Tis well that without end he should lament,<br/> Who for the love of thing that doth not last<br/> Eternally despoils him of that love!<br/></p>
				<p>As through the pure and tranquil evening air<br/> There shoots from time to time a sudden fire,<br/> Moving the eyes that steadfast were before,<br/></p>
				<p>And seems to be a star that changeth place,<br/> Except that in the part where it is kindled<br/> Nothing is missed, and this endureth little;<br/></p>
				<p>So from the horn that to the right extends<br/> Unto that cross’s foot there ran a star<br/> Out of the constellation shining there;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor was the gem dissevered from its ribbon,<br/> But down the radiant fillet ran along,<br/> So that fire seemed it behind alabaster.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus piteous did Anchises’ shade reach forward,<br/> If any faith our greatest Muse deserve,<br/> When in Elysium he his son perceived.<br/></p>
				<p>“O sanguis meus, O superinfusa<br/> Gratia Dei, sicut tibi, cui<br/> Bis unquam Coeli janua reclusa?”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus that effulgence; whence I gave it heed;<br/> Then round unto my Lady turned my sight,<br/> And on this side and that was stupefied;<br/></p>
				<p>For in her eyes was burning such a smile<br/> That with mine own methought I touched the bottom<br/> Both of my grace and of my Paradise!<br/></p>
				<p>Then, pleasant to the hearing and the sight,<br/> The spirit joined to its beginning things<br/> I understood not, so profound it spake;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor did it hide itself from me by choice,<br/> But by necessity; for its conception<br/> Above the mark of mortals set itself.<br/></p>
				<p>And when the bow of burning sympathy<br/> Was so far slackened, that its speech descended<br/> Towards the mark of our intelligence,<br/></p>
				<p>The first thing that was understood by me<br/> Was “Benedight be Thou, O Trine and One,<br/> Who hast unto my seed so courteous been!”<br/></p>
				<p>And it continued: “Hunger long and grateful,<br/> Drawn from the reading of the mighty volume<br/> Wherein is never changed the white nor dark,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hast appeased, my son, within this light<br/> In which I speak to thee, by grace of her<br/> Who to this lofty flight with plumage clothed thee.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou thinkest that to me thy thought doth pass<br/> From Him who is the first, as from the unit,<br/> If that be known, ray out the five and six;<br/></p>
				<p>And therefore who I am thou askest not,<br/> And why I seem more joyous unto thee<br/> Than any other of this gladsome crowd.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou think’st the truth; because the small and great<br/> Of this existence look into the mirror<br/> Wherein, before thou think’st, thy thought thou showest.<br/></p>
				<p>But that the sacred love, in which I watch<br/> With sight perpetual, and which makes me thirst<br/> With sweet desire, may better be fulfilled,<br/></p>
				<p>Now let thy voice secure and frank and glad<br/> Proclaim the wishes, the desire proclaim,<br/> To which my answer is decreed already.”<br/></p>
				<p>To Beatrice I turned me, and she heard<br/> Before I spake, and smiled to me a sign,<br/> That made the wings of my desire increase;<br/></p>
				<p>Then in this wise began I: “Love and knowledge,<br/> When on you dawned the first Equality,<br/> Of the same weight for each of you became;<br/></p>
				<p>For in the Sun, which lighted you and burned<br/> With heat and radiance, they so equal are,<br/> That all similitudes are insufficient.<br/></p>
				<p>But among mortals will and argument,<br/> For reason that to you is manifest,<br/> Diversely feathered in their pinions are.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I, who mortal am, feel in myself<br/> This inequality; so give not thanks,<br/> Save in my heart, for this paternal welcome.<br/></p>
				<p>Truly do I entreat thee, living topaz!<br/> Set in this precious jewel as a gem,<br/> That thou wilt satisfy me with thy name.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O leaf of mine, in whom I pleasure took<br/> E’en while awaiting, I was thine own root!”<br/> Such a beginning he in answer made me.<br/></p>
				<p>Then said to me: “That one from whom is named<br/> Thy race, and who a hundred years and more<br/> Has circled round the mount on the first cornice,<br/></p>
				<p>A son of mine and thy great-grandsire was;<br/> Well it behoves thee that the long fatigue<br/> Thou shouldst for him make shorter with thy works.<br/></p>
				<p>Florence, within the ancient boundary<br/> From which she taketh still her tierce and nones,<br/> Abode in quiet, temperate and chaste.<br/></p>
				<p>No golden chain she had, nor coronal,<br/> Nor ladies shod with sandal shoon, nor girdle<br/> That caught the eye more than the person did.<br/></p>
				<p>Not yet the daughter at her birth struck fear<br/> Into the father, for the time and dower<br/> Did not o’errun this side or that the measure.<br/></p>
				<p>No houses had she void of families,<br/> Not yet had thither come Sardanapalus<br/> To show what in a chamber can be done;<br/></p>
				<p>Not yet surpassed had Montemalo been<br/> By your Uccellatojo, which surpassed<br/> Shall in its downfall be as in its rise.<br/></p>
				<p>Bellincion Berti saw I go begirt<br/> With leather and with bone, and from the mirror<br/> His dame depart without a painted face;<br/></p>
				<p>And him of Nerli saw, and him of Vecchio,<br/> Contented with their simple suits of buff<br/> And with the spindle and the flax their dames.<br/></p>
				<p>O fortunate women! and each one was certain<br/> Of her own burial-place, and none as yet<br/> For sake of France was in her bed deserted.<br/></p>
				<p>One o’er the cradle kept her studious watch,<br/> And in her lullaby the language used<br/> That first delights the fathers and the mothers;<br/></p>
				<p>Another, drawing tresses from her distaff,<br/> Told o’er among her family the tales<br/> Of Trojans and of Fesole and Rome.<br/></p>
				<p>As great a marvel then would have been held<br/> A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,<br/> As Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.<br/></p>
				<p>To such a quiet, such a beautiful<br/> Life of the citizen, to such a safe<br/> Community, and to so sweet an inn,<br/></p>
				<p>Did Mary give me, with loud cries invoked,<br/> And in your ancient Baptistery at once<br/> Christian and Cacciaguida I became.<br/></p>
				<p>Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;<br/> From Val di Pado came to me my wife,<br/> And from that place thy surname was derived.<br/></p>
				<p>I followed afterward the Emperor Conrad,<br/> And he begirt me of his chivalry,<br/> So much I pleased him with my noble deeds.<br/></p>
				<p>I followed in his train against that law’s<br/> Iniquity, whose people doth usurp<br/> Your just possession, through your Pastor’s fault.<br/></p>
				<p>There by that execrable race was I<br/> Released from bonds of the fallacious world,<br/> The love of which defileth many souls,<br/></p>
				<p>And came from martyrdom unto this peace.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Cacciaguida’s Discourse of the Great Florentines</span>
				</h3>
				<p>O thou our poor nobility of blood,<br/> If thou dost make the people glory in thee<br/> Down here where our affection languishes,<br/></p>
				<p>A marvellous thing it ne’er will be to me;<br/> For there where appetite is not perverted,<br/> I say in Heaven, of thee I made a boast!<br/></p>
				<p>Truly thou art a cloak that quickly shortens,<br/> So that unless we piece thee day by day<br/> Time goeth round about thee with his shears!<br/></p>
				<p>With ‘You,’ which Rome was first to tolerate,<br/> (Wherein her family less perseveres,)<br/> Yet once again my words beginning made;<br/></p>
				<p>Whence Beatrice, who stood somewhat apart,<br/> Smiling, appeared like unto her who coughed<br/> At the first failing writ of Guenever.<br/></p>
				<p>And I began: “You are my ancestor,<br/> You give to me all hardihood to speak,<br/> You lift me so that I am more than I.<br/></p>
				<p>So many rivulets with gladness fill<br/> My mind, that of itself it makes a joy<br/> Because it can endure this and not burst.<br/></p>
				<p>Then tell me, my beloved root ancestral,<br/> Who were your ancestors, and what the years<br/> That in your boyhood chronicled themselves?<br/></p>
				<p>Tell me about the sheepfold of Saint John,<br/> How large it was, and who the people were<br/> Within it worthy of the highest seats.”<br/></p>
				<p>As at the blowing of the winds a coal<br/> Quickens to flame, so I beheld that light<br/> Become resplendent at my blandishments.<br/></p>
				<p>And as unto mine eyes it grew more fair,<br/> With voice more sweet and tender, but not in<br/> This modern dialect, it said to me:<br/></p>
				<p>“From uttering of the ’Ave,’ till the birth<br/> In which my mother, who is now a saint,<br/> Of me was lightened who had been her burden,<br/></p>
				<p>Unto its Lion had this fire returned<br/> Five hundred fifty times and thirty more,<br/> To reinflame itself beneath his paw.<br/></p>
				<p>My ancestors and I our birthplace had<br/> Where first is found the last ward of the city<br/> By him who runneth in your annual game.<br/></p>
				<p>Suffice it of my elders to hear this;<br/> But who they were, and whence they thither came,<br/> Silence is more considerate than speech.<br/></p>
				<p>All those who at that time were there between<br/> Mars and the Baptist, fit for bearing arms,<br/> Were a fifth part of those who now are living;<br/></p>
				<p>But the community, that now is mixed<br/> With Campi and Certaldo and Figghine,<br/> Pure in the lowest artisan was seen.<br/></p>
				<p>O how much better ’twere to have as neighbours<br/> The folk of whom I speak, and at Galluzzo<br/> And at Trespiano have your boundary,<br/></p>
				<p>Than have them in the town, and bear the stench<br/> Of Aguglione’s churl, and him of Signa<br/> Who has sharp eyes for trickery already.<br/></p>
				<p>Had not the folk, which most of all the world<br/> Degenerates, been a step-dame unto Caesar,<br/> But as a mother to her son benignant,<br/></p>
				<p>Some who turn Florentines, and trade and discount,<br/> Would have gone back again to Simifonte<br/> There where their grandsires went about as beggars.<br/></p>
				<p>At Montemurlo still would be the Counts,<br/> The Cerchi in the parish of Acone,<br/> Perhaps in Valdigrieve the Buondelmonti.<br/></p>
				<p>Ever the intermingling of the people<br/> Has been the source of malady in cities,<br/> As in the body food it surfeits on;<br/></p>
				<p>And a blind bull more headlong plunges down<br/> Than a blind lamb; and very often cuts<br/> Better and more a single sword than five.<br/></p>
				<p>If Luni thou regard, and Urbisaglia,<br/> How they have passed away, and how are passing<br/> Chiusi and Sinigaglia after them,<br/></p>
				<p>To hear how races waste themselves away,<br/> Will seem to thee no novel thing nor hard,<br/> Seeing that even cities have an end.<br/></p>
				<p>All things of yours have their mortality,<br/> Even as yourselves; but it is hidden in some<br/> That a long while endure, and lives are short;<br/></p>
				<p>And as the turning of the lunar heaven<br/> Covers and bares the shores without a pause,<br/> In the like manner fortune does with Florence.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore should not appear a marvellous thing<br/> What I shall say of the great Florentines<br/> Of whom the fame is hidden in the Past.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw the Ughi, saw the Catellini,<br/> Filippi, Greci, Ormanni, and Alberichi,<br/> Even in their fall illustrious citizens;<br/></p>
				<p>And saw, as mighty as they ancient were,<br/> With him of La Sannella him of Arca,<br/> And Soldanier, Ardinghi, and Bostichi.<br/></p>
				<p>Near to the gate that is at present laden<br/> With a new felony of so much weight<br/> That soon it shall be jetsam from the bark,<br/></p>
				<p>The Ravignani were, from whom descended<br/> The County Guido, and whoe’er the name<br/> Of the great Bellincione since hath taken.<br/></p>
				<p>He of La Pressa knew the art of ruling<br/> Already, and already Galigajo<br/> Had hilt and pommel gilded in his house.<br/></p>
				<p>Mighty already was the Column Vair,<br/> Sacchetti, Giuochi, Fifant, and Barucci,<br/> And Galli, and they who for the bushel blush.<br/></p>
				<p>The stock from which were the Calfucci born<br/> Was great already, and already chosen<br/> To curule chairs the Sizii and Arrigucci.<br/></p>
				<p>O how beheld I those who are undone<br/> By their own pride! and how the Balls of Gold<br/> Florence enflowered in all their mighty deeds!<br/></p>
				<p>So likewise did the ancestors of those<br/> Who evermore, when vacant is your church,<br/> Fatten by staying in consistory.<br/></p>
				<p>The insolent race, that like a dragon follows<br/> Whoever flees, and unto him that shows<br/> His teeth or purse is gentle as a lamb,<br/></p>
				<p>Already rising was, but from low people;<br/> So that it pleased not Ubertin Donato<br/> That his wife’s father should make him their kin.<br/></p>
				<p>Already had Caponsacco to the Market<br/> From Fesole descended, and already<br/> Giuda and Infangato were good burghers.<br/></p>
				<p>I’ll tell a thing incredible, but true;<br/> One entered the small circuit by a gate<br/> Which from the Della Pera took its name!<br/></p>
				<p>Each one that bears the beautiful escutcheon<br/> Of the great baron whose renown and name<br/> The festival of Thomas keepeth fresh,<br/></p>
				<p>Knighthood and privilege from him received;<br/> Though with the populace unites himself<br/> To-day the man who binds it with a border.<br/></p>
				<p>Already were Gualterotti and Importuni;<br/> And still more quiet would the Borgo be<br/> If with new neighbours it remained unfed.<br/></p>
				<p>The house from which is born your lamentation,<br/> Through just disdain that death among you brought<br/> And put an end unto your joyous life,<br/></p>
				<p>Was honoured in itself and its companions.<br/> O Buondelmonte, how in evil hour<br/> Thou fled’st the bridal at another’s promptings!<br/></p>
				<p>Many would be rejoicing who are sad,<br/> If God had thee surrendered to the Ema<br/> The first time that thou camest to the city.<br/></p>
				<p>But it behoved the mutilated stone<br/> Which guards the bridge, that Florence should provide<br/> A victim in her latest hour of peace.<br/></p>
				<p>With all these families, and others with them,<br/> Florence beheld I in so great repose,<br/> That no occasion had she whence to weep;<br/></p>
				<p>With all these families beheld so just<br/> And glorious her people, that the lily<br/> Never upon the spear was placed reversed,<br/></p>
				<p>Nor by division was vermilion made.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-17" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Cacciaguida’s Prophecy of Dante’s Banishment</span>
				</h3>
				<p>As came to Clymene, to be made certain<br/> Of that which he had heard against himself,<br/> He who makes fathers chary still to children,<br/></p>
				<p>Even such was I, and such was I perceived<br/> By Beatrice and by the holy light<br/> That first on my account had changed its place.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore my Lady said to me: “Send forth<br/> The flame of thy desire, so that it issue<br/> Imprinted well with the internal stamp;<br/></p>
				<p>Not that our knowledge may be greater made<br/> By speech of thine, but to accustom thee<br/> To tell thy thirst, that we may give thee drink.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O my beloved tree, (that so dost lift thee,<br/> That even as minds terrestrial perceive<br/> No triangle containeth two obtuse,<br/></p>
				<p>So thou beholdest the contingent things<br/> Ere in themselves they are, fixing thine eyes<br/> Upon the point in which all times are present,)<br/></p>
				<p>While I was with Virgilius conjoined<br/> Upon the mountain that the souls doth heal,<br/> And when descending into the dead world,<br/></p>
				<p>Were spoken to me of my future life<br/> Some grievous words; although I feel myself<br/> In sooth foursquare against the blows of chance.<br/></p>
				<p>On this account my wish would be content<br/> To hear what fortune is approaching me,<br/> Because foreseen an arrow comes more slowly.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did I say unto that selfsame light<br/> That unto me had spoken before; and even<br/> As Beatrice willed was my own will confessed.<br/></p>
				<p>Not in vague phrase, in which the foolish folk<br/> Ensnared themselves of old, ere yet was slain<br/> The Lamb of God who taketh sins away,<br/></p>
				<p>But with clear words and unambiguous<br/> Language responded that paternal love,<br/> Hid and revealed by its own proper smile:<br/></p>
				<p>“Contingency, that outside of the volume<br/> Of your materiality extends not,<br/> Is all depicted in the eternal aspect.<br/></p>
				<p>Necessity however thence it takes not,<br/> Except as from the eye, in which ’tis mirrored,<br/> A ship that with the current down descends.<br/></p>
				<p>From thence, e’en as there cometh to the ear<br/> Sweet harmony from an organ, comes in sight<br/> To me the time that is preparing for thee.<br/></p>
				<p>As forth from Athens went Hippolytus,<br/> By reason of his step-dame false and cruel,<br/> So thou from Florence must perforce depart.<br/></p>
				<p>Already this is willed, and this is sought for;<br/> And soon it shall be done by him who thinks it,<br/> Where every day the Christ is bought and sold.<br/></p>
				<p>The blame shall follow the offended party<br/> In outcry as is usual; but the vengeance<br/> Shall witness to the truth that doth dispense it.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou shalt abandon everything beloved<br/> Most tenderly, and this the arrow is<br/> Which first the bow of banishment shoots forth.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou shalt have proof how savoureth of salt<br/> The bread of others, and how hard a road<br/> The going down and up another’s stairs.<br/></p>
				<p>And that which most shall weigh upon thy shoulders<br/> Will be the bad and foolish company<br/> With which into this valley thou shalt fall;<br/></p>
				<p>For all ingrate, all mad and impious<br/> Will they become against thee; but soon after<br/> They, and not thou, shall have the forehead scarlet.<br/></p>
				<p>Of their bestiality their own proceedings<br/> Shall furnish proof; so ’twill be well for thee<br/> A party to have made thee by thyself.<br/></p>
				<p>Thine earliest refuge and thine earliest inn<br/> Shall be the mighty Lombard’s courtesy,<br/> Who on the Ladder bears the holy bird,<br/></p>
				<p>Who such benign regard shall have for thee<br/> That ’twixt you twain, in doing and in asking,<br/> That shall be first which is with others last.<br/></p>
				<p>With him shalt thou see one who at his birth<br/> Has by this star of strength been so impressed,<br/> That notable shall his achievements be.<br/></p>
				<p>Not yet the people are aware of him<br/> Through his young age, since only nine years yet<br/> Around about him have these wheels revolved.<br/></p>
				<p>But ere the Gascon cheat the noble Henry,<br/> Some sparkles of his virtue shall appear<br/> In caring not for silver nor for toil.<br/></p>
				<p>So recognized shall his magnificence<br/> Become hereafter, that his enemies<br/> Will not have power to keep mute tongues about it.<br/></p>
				<p>On him rely, and on his benefits;<br/> By him shall many people be transformed,<br/> Changing condition rich and mendicant;<br/></p>
				<p>And written in thy mind thou hence shalt bear<br/> Of him, but shalt not say it”⁠—and things said he<br/> Incredible to those who shall be present.<br/></p>
				<p>Then added: “Son, these are the commentaries<br/> On what was said to thee; behold the snares<br/> That are concealed behind few revolutions;<br/></p>
				<p>Yet would I not thy neighbours thou shouldst envy,<br/> Because thy life into the future reaches<br/> Beyond the punishment of their perfidies.”<br/></p>
				<p>When by its silence showed that sainted soul<br/> That it had finished putting in the woof<br/> Into that web which I had given it warped,<br/></p>
				<p>Began I, even as he who yearneth after,<br/> Being in doubt, some counsel from a person<br/> Who seeth, and uprightly wills, and loves:<br/></p>
				<p>“Well see I, father mine, how spurreth on<br/> The time towards me such a blow to deal me<br/> As heaviest is to him who most gives way.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore with foresight it is well I arm me,<br/> That, if the dearest place be taken from me,<br/> I may not lose the others by my songs.<br/></p>
				<p>Down through the world of infinite bitterness,<br/> And o’er the mountain, from whose beauteous summit<br/> The eyes of my own Lady lifted me,<br/></p>
				<p>And afterward through heaven from light to light,<br/> I have learned that which, if I tell again,<br/> Will be a savour of strong herbs to many.<br/></p>
				<p>And if I am a timid friend to truth,<br/> I fear lest I may lose my life with those<br/> Who will hereafter call this time the olden.”<br/></p>
				<p>The light in which was smiling my own treasure<br/> Which there I had discovered, flashed at first<br/> As in the sunshine doth a golden mirror;<br/></p>
				<p>Then made reply: “A conscience overcast<br/> Or with its own or with another’s shame,<br/> Will taste forsooth the tartness of thy word;<br/></p>
				<p>But ne’ertheless, all falsehood laid aside,<br/> Make manifest thy vision utterly,<br/> And let them scratch wherever is the itch;<br/></p>
				<p>For if thine utterance shall offensive be<br/> At the first taste, a vital nutriment<br/> ’Twill leave thereafter, when it is digested.<br/></p>
				<p>This cry of thine shall do as doth the wind,<br/> Which smiteth most the most exalted summits,<br/> And that is no slight argument of honour.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore are shown to thee within these wheels,<br/> Upon the mount and in the dolorous valley,<br/> Only the souls that unto fame are known;<br/></p>
				<p>Because the spirit of the hearer rests not,<br/> Nor doth confirm its faith by an example<br/> Which has the root of it unknown and hidden,<br/></p>
				<p>Or other reason that is not apparent.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-18" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Sixth Heaven, or that of Jupiter, where are seen the Spirits of Righteous Kings and Rulers.⁠—The Celestial Eagle</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Now was alone rejoicing in its word<br/> That soul beatified, and I was tasting<br/> My own, the bitter tempering with the sweet,<br/></p>
				<p>And the Lady who to God was leading me<br/> Said: “Change thy thought; consider that I am<br/> Near unto Him who every wrong disburdens.”<br/></p>
				<p>Unto the loving accents of my comfort<br/> I turned me round, and then what love I saw<br/> Within those holy eyes I here relinquish;<br/></p>
				<p>Not only that my language I distrust,<br/> But that my mind cannot return so far<br/> Above itself, unless another guide it.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus much upon that point can I repeat,<br/> That, her again beholding, my affection<br/> From every other longing was released.<br/></p>
				<p>While the eternal pleasure, which direct<br/> Rayed upon Beatrice, from her fair face<br/> Contented me with its reflected aspect,<br/></p>
				<p>Conquering me with the radiance of a smile,<br/> She said to me, “Turn thee about and listen;<br/> Not in mine eyes alone is Paradise.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as sometimes here do we behold<br/> The affection in the look, if it be such<br/> That all the soul is wrapt away by it,<br/></p>
				<p>So, by the flaming of the effulgence holy<br/> To which I turned, I recognized therein<br/> The wish of speaking to me somewhat farther.<br/></p>
				<p>And it began: “In this fifth resting-place<br/> Upon the tree that liveth by its summit,<br/> And aye bears fruit, and never loses leaf,<br/></p>
				<p>Are blessed spirits that below, ere yet<br/> They came to Heaven, were of such great renown<br/> That every Muse therewith would affluent be.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore look thou upon the cross’s horns;<br/> He whom I now shall name will there enact<br/> What doth within a cloud its own swift fire.”<br/></p>
				<p>I saw athwart the Cross a splendour drawn<br/> By naming Joshua, (even as he did it,)<br/> Nor noted I the word before the deed;<br/></p>
				<p>And at the name of the great Maccabee<br/> I saw another move itself revolving,<br/> And gladness was the whip unto that top.<br/></p>
				<p>Likewise for Charlemagne and for Orlando,<br/> Two of them my regard attentive followed<br/> As followeth the eye its falcon flying.<br/></p>
				<p>William thereafterward, and Renouard,<br/> And the Duke Godfrey, did attract my sight<br/> Along upon that Cross, and Robert Guiscard.<br/></p>
				<p>Then, moved and mingled with the other lights,<br/> The soul that had addressed me showed how great<br/> An artist ’twas among the heavenly singers.<br/></p>
				<p>To my right side I turned myself around,<br/> My duty to behold in Beatrice<br/> Either by words or gesture signified;<br/></p>
				<p>And so translucent I beheld her eyes,<br/> So full of pleasure, that her countenance<br/> Surpassed its other and its latest wont.<br/></p>
				<p>And as, by feeling greater delectation,<br/> A man in doing good from day to day<br/> Becomes aware his virtue is increasing,<br/></p>
				<p>So I became aware that my gyration<br/> With heaven together had increased its arc,<br/> That miracle beholding more adorned.<br/></p>
				<p>And such as is the change, in little lapse<br/> Of time, in a pale woman, when her face<br/> Is from the load of bashfulness unladen,<br/></p>
				<p>Such was it in mine eyes, when I had turned,<br/> Caused by the whiteness of the temperate star,<br/> The sixth, which to itself had gathered me.<br/></p>
				<p>Within that Jovial torch did I behold<br/> The sparkling of the love which was therein<br/> Delineate our language to mine eyes.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as birds uprisen from the shore,<br/> As in congratulation o’er their food,<br/> Make squadrons of themselves, now round, now long,<br/></p>
				<p>So from within those lights the holy creatures<br/> Sang flying to and fro, and in their figures<br/> Made of themselves now D, now I, now L.<br/></p>
				<p>First singing they to their own music moved;<br/> Then one becoming of these characters,<br/> A little while they rested and were silent.<br/></p>
				<p>O divine Pegasea, thou who genius<br/> Dost glorious make, and render it long-lived,<br/> And this through thee the cities and the kingdoms,<br/></p>
				<p>Illume me with thyself, that I may bring<br/> Their figures out as I have them conceived!<br/> Apparent be thy power in these brief verses!<br/></p>
				<p>Themselves then they displayed in five times seven<br/> Vowels and consonants; and I observed<br/> The parts as they seemed spoken unto me.<br/></p>
				<p>‘Diligite justitiam,’ these were<br/> First verb and noun of all that was depicted;<br/> ‘Qui judicatis terram’ were the last.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafter in the M of the fifth word<br/> Remained they so arranged, that Jupiter<br/> Seemed to be silver there with gold inlaid.<br/></p>
				<p>And other lights I saw descend where was<br/> The summit of the M, and pause there singing<br/> The good, I think, that draws them to itself.<br/></p>
				<p>Then, as in striking upon burning logs<br/> Upward there fly innumerable sparks,<br/> Whence fools are wont to look for auguries,<br/></p>
				<p>More than a thousand lights seemed thence to rise,<br/> And to ascend, some more, and others less,<br/> Even as the Sun that lights them had allotted;<br/></p>
				<p>And, each one being quiet in its place,<br/> The head and neck beheld I of an eagle<br/> Delineated by that inlaid fire.<br/></p>
				<p>He who there paints has none to be his guide;<br/> But Himself guides; and is from Him remembered<br/> That virtue which is form unto the nest.<br/></p>
				<p>The other beatitude, that contented seemed<br/> At first to bloom a lily on the M,<br/> By a slight motion followed out the imprint.<br/></p>
				<p>O gentle star! what and how many gems<br/> Did demonstrate to me, that all our justice<br/> Effect is of that heaven which thou ingemmest!<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore I pray the Mind, in which begin<br/> Thy motion and thy virtue, to regard<br/> Whence comes the smoke that vitiates thy rays;<br/></p>
				<p>So that a second time it now be wroth<br/> With buying and with selling in the temple<br/> Whose walls were built with signs and martyrdoms!<br/></p>
				<p>O soldiery of heaven, whom I contemplate,<br/> Implore for those who are upon the earth<br/> All gone astray after the bad example!<br/></p>
				<p>Once ’twas the custom to make war with swords;<br/> But now ’tis made by taking here and there<br/> The bread the pitying Father shuts from none.<br/></p>
				<p>Yet thou, who writest but to cancel, think<br/> That Peter and that Paul, who for this vineyard<br/> Which thou art spoiling died, are still alive!<br/></p>
				<p>Well canst thou say: “So steadfast my desire<br/> Is unto him who willed to live alone,<br/> And for a dance was led to martyrdom,<br/></p>
				<p>That I know not the Fisherman nor Paul.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-19" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Eagle discourses of Salvation by Faith</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Appeared before me with its wings outspread<br/> The beautiful image that in sweet fruition<br/> Made jubilant the interwoven souls;<br/></p>
				<p>Appeared a little ruby each, wherein<br/> Ray of the sun was burning so enkindled<br/> That each into mine eyes refracted it.<br/></p>
				<p>And what it now behoves me to retrace<br/> Nor voice has e’er reported, nor ink written,<br/> Nor was by fantasy e’er comprehended;<br/></p>
				<p>For speak I saw, and likewise heard, the beak,<br/> And utter with its voice both ‘I’ and ‘My,’<br/> When in conception it was ‘We’ and ‘Our.’<br/></p>
				<p>And it began: “Being just and merciful<br/> Am I exalted here unto that glory<br/> Which cannot be exceeded by desire;<br/></p>
				<p>And upon earth I left my memory<br/> Such, that the evil-minded people there<br/> Commend it, but continue not the story.”<br/></p>
				<p>So doth a single heat from many embers<br/> Make itself felt, even as from many loves<br/> Issued a single sound from out that image.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence I thereafter: “O perpetual flowers<br/> Of the eternal joy, that only one<br/> Make me perceive your odours manifold,<br/></p>
				<p>Exhaling, break within me the great fast<br/> Which a long season has in hunger held me,<br/> Not finding for it any food on earth.<br/></p>
				<p>Well do I know, that if in heaven its mirror<br/> Justice Divine another realm doth make,<br/> Yours apprehends it not through any veil.<br/></p>
				<p>You know how I attentively address me<br/> To listen; and you know what is the doubt<br/> That is in me so very old a fast.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a falcon, issuing from his hood,<br/> Doth move his head, and with his wings applaud him,<br/> Showing desire, and making himself fine,<br/></p>
				<p>Saw I become that standard, which of lauds<br/> Was interwoven of the grace divine,<br/> With such songs as he knows who there rejoices.<br/></p>
				<p>Then it began: “He who a compass turned<br/> On the world’s outer verge, and who within it<br/> Devised so much occult and manifest,<br/></p>
				<p>Could not the impress of his power so make<br/> On all the universe, as that his Word<br/> Should not remain in infinite excess.<br/></p>
				<p>And this makes certain that the first proud being,<br/> Who was the paragon of every creature,<br/> By not awaiting light fell immature.<br/></p>
				<p>And hence appears it, that each minor nature<br/> Is scant receptacle unto that good<br/> Which has no end, and by itself is measured.<br/></p>
				<p>In consequence our vision, which perforce<br/> Must be some ray of that intelligence<br/> With which all things whatever are replete,<br/></p>
				<p>Cannot in its own nature be so potent,<br/> That it shall not its origin discern<br/> Far beyond that which is apparent to it.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore into the justice sempiternal<br/> The power of vision that your world receives,<br/> As eye into the ocean, penetrates;<br/></p>
				<p>Which, though it see the bottom near the shore,<br/> Upon the deep perceives it not, and yet<br/> ’Tis there, but it is hidden by the depth.<br/></p>
				<p>There is no light but comes from the serene<br/> That never is o’ercast, nay, it is darkness<br/> Or shadow of the flesh, or else its poison.<br/></p>
				<p>Amply to thee is opened now the cavern<br/> Which has concealed from thee the living justice<br/> Of which thou mad’st such frequent questioning.<br/></p>
				<p>For saidst thou: ‘Born a man is on the shore<br/> Of Indus, and is none who there can speak<br/> Of Christ, nor who can read, nor who can write;<br/></p>
				<p>And all his inclinations and his actions<br/> Are good, so far as human reason sees,<br/> Without a sin in life or in discourse:<br/></p>
				<p>He dieth unbaptised and without faith;<br/> Where is this justice that condemneth him?<br/> Where is his fault, if he do not believe?’<br/></p>
				<p>Now who art thou, that on the bench wouldst sit<br/> In judgment at a thousand miles away,<br/> With the short vision of a single span?<br/></p>
				<p>Truly to him who with me subtilizes,<br/> If so the Scripture were not over you,<br/> For doubting there were marvellous occasion.<br/></p>
				<p>O animals terrene, O stolid minds,<br/> The primal will, that in itself is good,<br/> Ne’er from itself, the Good Supreme, has moved.<br/></p>
				<p>So much is just as is accordant with it;<br/> No good created draws it to itself,<br/> But it, by raying forth, occasions that.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as above her nest goes circling round<br/> The stork when she has fed her little ones,<br/> And he who has been fed looks up at her,<br/></p>
				<p>So lifted I my brows, and even such<br/> Became the blessed image, which its wings<br/> Was moving, by so many counsels urged.<br/></p>
				<p>Circling around it sang, and said: “As are<br/> My notes to thee, who dost not comprehend them,<br/> Such is the eternal judgment to you mortals.”<br/></p>
				<p>Those lucent splendours of the Holy Spirit<br/> Grew quiet then, but still within the standard<br/> That made the Romans reverend to the world.<br/></p>
				<p>It recommenced: “Unto this kingdom never<br/> Ascended one who had not faith in Christ,<br/> Before or since he to the tree was nailed.<br/></p>
				<p>But look thou, many crying are, ‘Christ, Christ!’<br/> Who at the judgment shall be far less near<br/> To him than some shall be who knew not Christ.<br/></p>
				<p>Such Christians shall the Ethiop condemn,<br/> When the two companies shall be divided,<br/> The one for ever rich, the other poor.<br/></p>
				<p>What to your kings may not the Persians say,<br/> When they that volume opened shall behold<br/> In which are written down all their dispraises?<br/></p>
				<p>There shall be seen, among the deeds of Albert,<br/> That which ere long shall set the pen in motion,<br/> For which the realm of Prague shall be deserted.<br/></p>
				<p>There shall be seen the woe that on the Seine<br/> He brings by falsifying of the coin,<br/> Who by the blow of a wild boar shall die.<br/></p>
				<p>There shall be seen the pride that causes thirst,<br/> Which makes the Scot and Englishman so mad<br/> That they within their boundaries cannot rest;<br/></p>
				<p>Be seen the luxury and effeminate life<br/> Of him of Spain, and the Bohemian,<br/> Who valour never knew and never wished;<br/></p>
				<p>Be seen the Cripple of Jerusalem,<br/> His goodness represented by an I,<br/> While the reverse an M shall represent;<br/></p>
				<p>Be seen the avarice and poltroonery<br/> Of him who guards the Island of the Fire,<br/> Wherein Anchises finished his long life;<br/></p>
				<p>And to declare how pitiful he is<br/> Shall be his record in contracted letters<br/> Which shall make note of much in little space.<br/></p>
				<p>And shall appear to each one the foul deeds<br/> Of uncle and of brother who a nation<br/> So famous have dishonoured, and two crowns.<br/></p>
				<p>And he of Portugal and he of Norway<br/> Shall there be known, and he of Rascia too,<br/> Who saw in evil hour the coin of Venice.<br/></p>
				<p>O happy Hungary, if she let herself<br/> Be wronged no farther! and Navarre the happy,<br/> If with the hills that gird her she be armed!<br/></p>
				<p>And each one may believe that now, as hansel<br/> Thereof, do Nicosia and Famagosta<br/> Lament and rage because of their own beast,<br/></p>
				<p>Who from the others’ flank departeth not.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-20" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Eagle praises the Righteous Kings of old</span>
				</h3>
				<p>When he who all the world illuminates<br/> Out of our hemisphere so far descends<br/> That on all sides the daylight is consumed,<br/></p>
				<p>The heaven, that erst by him alone was kindled,<br/> Doth suddenly reveal itself again<br/> By many lights, wherein is one resplendent.<br/></p>
				<p>And came into my mind this act of heaven,<br/> When the ensign of the world and of its leaders<br/> Had silent in the blessed beak become;<br/></p>
				<p>Because those living luminaries all,<br/> By far more luminous, did songs begin<br/> Lapsing and falling from my memory.<br/></p>
				<p>O gentle Love, that with a smile dost cloak thee,<br/> How ardent in those sparks didst thou appear,<br/> That had the breath alone of holy thoughts!<br/></p>
				<p>After the precious and pellucid crystals,<br/> With which begemmed the sixth light I beheld,<br/> Silence imposed on the angelic bells,<br/></p>
				<p>I seemed to hear the murmuring of a river<br/> That clear descendeth down from rock to rock,<br/> Showing the affluence of its mountain-top.<br/></p>
				<p>And as the sound upon the cithern’s neck<br/> Taketh its form, and as upon the vent<br/> Of rustic pipe the wind that enters it,<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus, relieved from the delay of waiting,<br/> That murmuring of the eagle mounted up<br/> Along its neck, as if it had been hollow.<br/></p>
				<p>There it became a voice, and issued thence<br/> From out its beak, in such a form of words<br/> As the heart waited for wherein I wrote them.<br/></p>
				<p>“The part in me which sees and bears the sun<br/> In mortal eagles,” it began to me,<br/> “Now fixedly must needs be looked upon;<br/></p>
				<p>For of the fires of which I make my figure,<br/> Those whence the eye doth sparkle in my head<br/> Of all their orders the supremest are.<br/></p>
				<p>He who is shining in the midst as pupil<br/> Was once the singer of the Holy Spirit,<br/> Who bore the ark from city unto city;<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he the merit of his song,<br/> In so far as effect of his own counsel,<br/> By the reward which is commensurate.<br/></p>
				<p>Of five, that make a circle for my brow,<br/> He that approacheth nearest to my beak<br/> Did the poor widow for her son console;<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he how dearly it doth cost<br/> Not following Christ, by the experience<br/> Of this sweet life and of its opposite.<br/></p>
				<p>He who comes next in the circumference<br/> Of which I speak, upon its highest arc,<br/> Did death postpone by penitence sincere;<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he that the eternal judgment<br/> Suffers no change, albeit worthy prayer<br/> Maketh below to-morrow of to-day.<br/></p>
				<p>The next who follows, with the laws and me,<br/> Under the good intent that bore bad fruit<br/> Became a Greek by ceding to the pastor;<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he how all the ill deduced<br/> From his good action is not harmful to him,<br/> Although the world thereby may be destroyed.<br/></p>
				<p>And he, whom in the downward arc thou seest,<br/> Guglielmo was, whom the same land deplores<br/> That weepeth Charles and Frederick yet alive;<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he how heaven enamoured is<br/> With a just king; and in the outward show<br/> Of his effulgence he reveals it still.<br/></p>
				<p>Who would believe, down in the errant world,<br/> That e’er the Trojan Ripheus in this round<br/> Could be the fifth one of the holy lights?<br/></p>
				<p>Now knoweth he enough of what the world<br/> Has not the power to see of grace divine,<br/> Although his sight may not discern the bottom.”<br/></p>
				<p>Like as a lark that in the air expatiates,<br/> First singing and then silent with content<br/> Of the last sweetness that doth satisfy her,<br/></p>
				<p>Such seemed to me the image of the imprint<br/> Of the eternal pleasure, by whose will<br/> Doth everything become the thing it is.<br/></p>
				<p>And notwithstanding to my doubt I was<br/> As glass is to the colour that invests it,<br/> To wait the time in silence it endured not,<br/></p>
				<p>But forth from out my mouth, “What things are these?”<br/> Extorted with the force of its own weight;<br/> Whereat I saw great joy of coruscation.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafterward with eye still more enkindled<br/> The blessed standard made to me reply,<br/> To keep me not in wonderment suspended:<br/></p>
				<p>“I see that thou believest in these things<br/> Because I say them, but thou seest not how;<br/> So that, although believed in, they are hidden.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou doest as he doth who a thing by name<br/> Well apprehendeth, but its quiddity<br/> Cannot perceive, unless another show it.<br/></p>
				<p>‘Regnum coelorum’ suffereth violence<br/> From fervent love, and from that living hope<br/> That overcometh the Divine volition;<br/></p>
				<p>Not in the guise that man o’ercometh man,<br/> But conquers it because it will be conquered,<br/> And conquered conquers by benignity.<br/></p>
				<p>The first life of the eyebrow and the fifth<br/> Cause thee astonishment, because with them<br/> Thou seest the region of the angels painted.<br/></p>
				<p>They passed not from their bodies, as thou thinkest,<br/> Gentiles, but Christians in the steadfast faith<br/> Of feet that were to suffer and had suffered.<br/></p>
				<p>For one from Hell, where no one e’er turns back<br/> Unto good will, returned unto his bones,<br/> And that of living hope was the reward⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>Of living hope, that placed its efficacy<br/> In prayers to God made to resuscitate him,<br/> So that ’twere possible to move his will.<br/></p>
				<p>The glorious soul concerning which I speak,<br/> Returning to the flesh, where brief its stay,<br/> Believed in Him who had the power to aid it;<br/></p>
				<p>And, in believing, kindled to such fire<br/> Of genuine love, that at the second death<br/> Worthy it was to come unto this joy.<br/></p>
				<p>The other one, through grace, that from so deep<br/> A fountain wells that never hath the eye<br/> Of any creature reached its primal wave,<br/></p>
				<p>Set all his love below on righteousness;<br/> Wherefore from grace to grace did God unclose<br/> His eye to our redemption yet to be,<br/></p>
				<p>Whence he believed therein, and suffered not<br/> From that day forth the stench of paganism,<br/> And he reproved therefor the folk perverse.<br/></p>
				<p>Those Maidens three, whom at the right-hand wheel<br/> Thou didst behold, were unto him for baptism<br/> More than a thousand years before baptizing.<br/></p>
				<p>O thou predestination, how remote<br/> Thy root is from the aspect of all those<br/> Who the First Cause do not behold entire!<br/></p>
				<p>And you, O mortals! hold yourselves restrained<br/> In judging; for ourselves, who look on God,<br/> We do not know as yet all the elect;<br/></p>
				<p>And sweet to us is such a deprivation,<br/> Because our good in this good is made perfect,<br/> That whatsoe’er God wills, we also will.”<br/></p>
				<p>After this manner by that shape divine,<br/> To make clear in me my short-sightedness,<br/> Was given to me a pleasant medicine;<br/></p>
				<p>And as good singer a good lutanist<br/> Accompanies with vibrations of the chords,<br/> Whereby more pleasantness the song acquires,<br/></p>
				<p>So, while it spake, do I remember me<br/> That I beheld both of those blessed lights,<br/> Even as the winking of the eyes concords,<br/></p>
				<p>Moving unto the words their little flames.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-21" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Seventh Heaven, or that of Saturn, where are seen the Spirits of the Contemplative.⁠—The Celestial Stairway.⁠—<abbr>St.</abbr> Peter Damiano.⁠—His Invectives against the Luxury of the Prelates</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Already on my Lady’s face mine eyes<br/> Again were fastened, and with these my mind,<br/> And from all other purpose was withdrawn;<br/></p>
				<p>And she smiled not; but “If I were to smile,”<br/> She unto me began, “thou wouldst become<br/> Like Semele, when she was turned to ashes.<br/></p>
				<p>Because my beauty, that along the stairs<br/> Of the eternal palace more enkindles,<br/> As thou hast seen, the farther we ascend,<br/></p>
				<p>If it were tempered not, is so resplendent<br/> That all thy mortal power in its effulgence<br/> Would seem a leaflet that the thunder crushes.<br/></p>
				<p>We are uplifted to the seventh splendour,<br/> That underneath the burning Lion’s breast<br/> Now radiates downward mingled with his power.<br/></p>
				<p>Fix in direction of thine eyes the mind,<br/> And make of them a mirror for the figure<br/> That in this mirror shall appear to thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>He who could know what was the pasturage<br/> My sight had in that blessed countenance,<br/> When I transferred me to another care,<br/></p>
				<p>Would recognize how grateful was to me<br/> Obedience unto my celestial escort,<br/> By counterpoising one side with the other.<br/></p>
				<p>Within the crystal which, around the world<br/> Revolving, bears the name of its dear leader,<br/> Under whom every wickedness lay dead,<br/></p>
				<p>Coloured like gold, on which the sunshine gleams,<br/> A stairway I beheld to such a height<br/> Uplifted, that mine eye pursued it not.<br/></p>
				<p>Likewise beheld I down the steps descending<br/> So many splendours, that I thought each light<br/> That in the heaven appears was there diffused.<br/></p>
				<p>And as accordant with their natural custom<br/> The rooks together at the break of day<br/> Bestir themselves to warm their feathers cold;<br/></p>
				<p>Then some of them fly off without return,<br/> Others come back to where they started from,<br/> And others, wheeling round, still keep at home;<br/></p>
				<p>Such fashion it appeared to me was there<br/> Within the sparkling that together came,<br/> As soon as on a certain step it struck,<br/></p>
				<p>And that which nearest unto us remained<br/> Became so clear, that in my thought I said,<br/> “Well I perceive the love thou showest me;<br/></p>
				<p>But she, from whom I wait the how and when<br/> Of speech and silence, standeth still; whence I<br/> Against desire do well if I ask not.”<br/></p>
				<p>She thereupon, who saw my silentness<br/> In the sight of Him who seeth everything,<br/> Said unto me, “Let loose thy warm desire.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I began: “No merit of my own<br/> Renders me worthy of response from thee;<br/> But for her sake who granteth me the asking,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou blessed life that dost remain concealed<br/> In thy beatitude, make known to me<br/> The cause which draweth thee so near my side;<br/></p>
				<p>And tell me why is silent in this wheel<br/> The dulcet symphony of Paradise,<br/> That through the rest below sounds so devoutly.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Thou hast thy hearing mortal as thy sight,”<br/> It answer made to me; “they sing not here,<br/> For the same cause that Beatrice has not smiled.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus far adown the holy stairway’s steps<br/> Have I descended but to give thee welcome<br/> With words, and with the light that mantles me;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor did more love cause me to be more ready,<br/> For love as much and more up there is burning,<br/> As doth the flaming manifest to thee.<br/></p>
				<p>But the high charity, that makes us servants<br/> Prompt to the counsel which controls the world,<br/> Allotteth here, even as thou dost observe.”<br/></p>
				<p>“I see full well,” said I, “O sacred lamp!<br/> How love unfettered in this court sufficeth<br/> To follow the eternal Providence;<br/></p>
				<p>But this is what seems hard for me to see,<br/> Wherefore predestinate wast thou alone<br/> Unto this office from among thy consorts.”<br/></p>
				<p>No sooner had I come to the last word,<br/> Than of its middle made the light a centre,<br/> Whirling itself about like a swift millstone.<br/></p>
				<p>When answer made the love that was therein:<br/> “On me directed is a light divine,<br/> Piercing through this in which I am embosomed,<br/></p>
				<p>Of which the virtue with my sight conjoined<br/> Lifts me above myself so far, I see<br/> The supreme essence from which this is drawn.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence comes the joyfulness with which I flame,<br/> For to my sight, as far as it is clear,<br/> The clearness of the flame I equal make.<br/></p>
				<p>But that soul in the heaven which is most pure,<br/> That seraph which his eye on God most fixes,<br/> Could this demand of thine not satisfy;<br/></p>
				<p>Because so deeply sinks in the abyss<br/> Of the eternal statute what thou askest,<br/> From all created sight it is cut off.<br/></p>
				<p>And to the mortal world, when thou returnest,<br/> This carry back, that it may not presume<br/> Longer tow’rd such a goal to move its feet.<br/></p>
				<p>The mind, that shineth here, on earth doth smoke;<br/> From this observe how can it do below<br/> That which it cannot though the heaven assume it?”<br/></p>
				<p>Such limit did its words prescribe to me,<br/> The question I relinquished, and restricted<br/> Myself to ask it humbly who it was.<br/></p>
				<p>“Between two shores of Italy rise cliffs,<br/> And not far distant from thy native place,<br/> So high, the thunders far below them sound,<br/></p>
				<p>And form a ridge that Catria is called,<br/> ’Neath which is consecrate a hermitage<br/> Wont to be dedicate to worship only.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus unto me the third speech recommenced,<br/> And then, continuing, it said: “Therein<br/> Unto God’s service I became so steadfast,<br/></p>
				<p>That feeding only on the juice of olives<br/> Lightly I passed away the heats and frosts,<br/> Contented in my thoughts contemplative.<br/></p>
				<p>That cloister used to render to these heavens<br/> Abundantly, and now is empty grown,<br/> So that perforce it soon must be revealed.<br/></p>
				<p>I in that place was Peter Damiano;<br/> And Peter the Sinner was I in the house<br/> Of Our Lady on the Adriatic shore.<br/></p>
				<p>Little of mortal life remained to me,<br/> When I was called and dragged forth to the hat<br/> Which shifteth evermore from bad to worse.<br/></p>
				<p>Came Cephas, and the mighty Vessel came<br/> Of the Holy Spirit, meagre and barefooted,<br/> Taking the food of any hostelry.<br/></p>
				<p>Now some one to support them on each side<br/> The modern shepherds need, and some to lead them,<br/> So heavy are they, and to hold their trains.<br/></p>
				<p>They cover up their palfreys with their cloaks,<br/> So that two beasts go underneath one skin;<br/> O Patience, that dost tolerate so much!”<br/></p>
				<p>At this voice saw I many little flames<br/> From step to step descending and revolving,<br/> And every revolution made them fairer.<br/></p>
				<p>Round about this one came they and stood still,<br/> And a cry uttered of so loud a sound,<br/> It here could find no parallel, nor I<br/></p>
				<p>Distinguished it, the thunder so o’ercame me.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-22" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Benedict.⁠—His Lamentation over the Corruption of the Monks.⁠—The Eighth Heaven, or that of the Fixed Stars</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Oppressed with stupor, I unto my guide<br/> Turned like a little child who always runs<br/> For refuge there where he confideth most;<br/></p>
				<p>And she, even as a mother who straightway<br/> Gives comfort to her pale and breathless boy<br/> With voice whose wont it is to reassure him,<br/></p>
				<p>Said to me: “Knowest thou not thou art in heaven,<br/> And knowest thou not that heaven is holy all<br/> And what is done here cometh from good zeal?<br/></p>
				<p>After what wise the singing would have changed thee<br/> And I by smiling, thou canst now imagine,<br/> Since that the cry has startled thee so much,<br/></p>
				<p>In which if thou hadst understood its prayers<br/> Already would be known to thee the vengeance<br/> Which thou shalt look upon before thou diest.<br/></p>
				<p>The sword above here smiteth not in haste<br/> Nor tardily, howe’er it seem to him<br/> Who fearing or desiring waits for it.<br/></p>
				<p>But turn thee round towards the others now,<br/> For very illustrious spirits shalt thou see,<br/> If thou thy sight directest as I say.”<br/></p>
				<p>As it seemed good to her mine eyes I turned,<br/> And saw a hundred spherules that together<br/> With mutual rays each other more embellished.<br/></p>
				<p>I stood as one who in himself represses<br/> The point of his desire, and ventures not<br/> To question, he so feareth the too much.<br/></p>
				<p>And now the largest and most luculent<br/> Among those pearls came forward, that it might<br/> Make my desire concerning it content.<br/></p>
				<p>Within it then I heard: “If thou couldst see<br/> Even as myself the charity that burns<br/> Among us, thy conceits would be expressed;<br/></p>
				<p>But, that by waiting thou mayst not come late<br/> To the high end, I will make answer even<br/> Unto the thought of which thou art so chary.<br/></p>
				<p>That mountain on whose slope Cassino stands<br/> Was frequented of old upon its summit<br/> By a deluded folk and ill-disposed;<br/></p>
				<p>And I am he who first up thither bore<br/> The name of Him who brought upon the earth<br/> The truth that so much sublimateth us.<br/></p>
				<p>And such abundant grace upon me shone<br/> That all the neighbouring towns I drew away<br/> From the impious worship that seduced the world.<br/></p>
				<p>These other fires, each one of them, were men<br/> Contemplative, enkindled by that heat<br/> Which maketh holy flowers and fruits spring up.<br/></p>
				<p>Here is Macarius, here is Romualdus,<br/> Here are my brethren, who within the cloisters<br/> Their footsteps stayed and kept a steadfast heart.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to him: “The affection which thou showest<br/> Speaking with me, and the good countenance<br/> Which I behold and note in all your ardours,<br/></p>
				<p>In me have so my confidence dilated<br/> As the sun doth the rose, when it becomes<br/> As far unfolded as it hath the power.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore I pray, and thou assure me, father,<br/> If I may so much grace receive, that I<br/> May thee behold with countenance unveiled.”<br/></p>
				<p>He thereupon: “Brother, thy high desire<br/> In the remotest sphere shall be fulfilled,<br/> Where are fulfilled all others and my own.<br/></p>
				<p>There perfect is, and ripened, and complete,<br/> Every desire; within that one alone<br/> Is every part where it has always been;<br/></p>
				<p>For it is not in space, nor turns on poles,<br/> And unto it our stairway reaches up,<br/> Whence thus from out thy sight it steals away.<br/></p>
				<p>Up to that height the Patriarch Jacob saw it<br/> Extending its supernal part, what time<br/> So thronged with angels it appeared to him.<br/></p>
				<p>But to ascend it now no one uplifts<br/> His feet from off the earth, and now my Rule<br/> Below remaineth for mere waste of paper.<br/></p>
				<p>The walls that used of old to be an Abbey<br/> Are changed to dens of robbers, and the cowls<br/> Are sacks filled full of miserable flour.<br/></p>
				<p>But heavy usury is not taken up<br/> So much against God’s pleasure as that fruit<br/> Which maketh so insane the heart of monks;<br/></p>
				<p>For whatsoever hath the Church in keeping<br/> Is for the folk that ask it in God’s name,<br/> Not for one’s kindred or for something worse.<br/></p>
				<p>The flesh of mortals is so very soft,<br/> That good beginnings down below suffice not<br/> From springing of the oak to bearing acorns.<br/></p>
				<p>Peter began with neither gold nor silver,<br/> And I with orison and abstinence,<br/> And Francis with humility his convent.<br/></p>
				<p>And if thou lookest at each one’s beginning,<br/> And then regardest whither he has run,<br/> Thou shalt behold the white changed into brown.<br/></p>
				<p>In verity the Jordan backward turned,<br/> And the sea’s fleeing, when God willed were more<br/> A wonder to behold, than succour here.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus unto me he said; and then withdrew<br/> To his own band, and the band closed together;<br/> Then like a whirlwind all was upward rapt.<br/></p>
				<p>The gentle Lady urged me on behind them<br/> Up o’er that stairway by a single sign,<br/> So did her virtue overcome my nature;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor here below, where one goes up and down<br/> By natural law, was motion e’er so swift<br/> That it could be compared unto my wing.<br/></p>
				<p>Reader, as I may unto that devout<br/> Triumph return, on whose account I often<br/> For my transgressions weep and beat my breast⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>Thou hadst not thrust thy finger in the fire<br/> And drawn it out again, before I saw<br/> The sign that follows Taurus, and was in it.<br/></p>
				<p>O glorious stars, O light impregnated<br/> With mighty virtue, from which I acknowledge<br/> All of my genius, whatsoe’er it be,<br/></p>
				<p>With you was born, and hid himself with you,<br/> He who is father of all mortal life,<br/> When first I tasted of the Tuscan air;<br/></p>
				<p>And then when grace was freely given to me<br/> To enter the high wheel which turns you round,<br/> Your region was allotted unto me.<br/></p>
				<p>To you devoutly at this hour my soul<br/> Is sighing, that it virtue may acquire<br/> For the stern pass that draws it to itself.<br/></p>
				<p>“Thou art so near unto the last salvation,”<br/> Thus Beatrice began, “thou oughtest now<br/> To have thine eves unclouded and acute;<br/></p>
				<p>And therefore, ere thou enter farther in,<br/> Look down once more, and see how vast a world<br/> Thou hast already put beneath thy feet;<br/></p>
				<p>So that thy heart, as jocund as it may,<br/> Present itself to the triumphant throng<br/> That comes rejoicing through this rounded ether.”<br/></p>
				<p>I with my sight returned through one and all<br/> The sevenfold spheres, and I beheld this globe<br/> Such that I smiled at its ignoble semblance;<br/></p>
				<p>And that opinion I approve as best<br/> Which doth account it least; and he who thinks<br/> Of something else may truly be called just.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw the daughter of Latona shining<br/> Without that shadow, which to me was cause<br/> That once I had believed her rare and dense.<br/></p>
				<p>The aspect of thy son, Hyperion,<br/> Here I sustained, and saw how move themselves<br/> Around and near him Maia and Dione.<br/></p>
				<p>Thence there appeared the temperateness of Jove<br/> ’Twixt son and father, and to me was clear<br/> The change that of their whereabout they make;<br/></p>
				<p>And all the seven made manifest to me<br/> How great they are, and eke how swift they are,<br/> And how they are in distant habitations.<br/></p>
				<p>The threshing-floor that maketh us so proud,<br/> To me revolving with the eternal Twins,<br/> Was all apparent made from hill to harbour!<br/></p>
				<p>Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes I turned.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-23" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Triumph of Christ</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Even as a bird, ‘mid the beloved leaves,<br/> Quiet upon the nest of her sweet brood<br/> Throughout the night, that hideth all things from us,<br/></p>
				<p>Who, that she may behold their longed-for looks<br/> And find the food wherewith to nourish them,<br/> In which, to her, grave labours grateful are,<br/></p>
				<p>Anticipates the time on open spray<br/> And with an ardent longing waits the sun,<br/> Gazing intent as soon as breaks the dawn:<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus my Lady standing was, erect<br/> And vigilant, turned round towards the zone<br/> Underneath which the sun displays less haste;<br/></p>
				<p>So that beholding her distraught and wistful,<br/> Such I became as he is who desiring<br/> For something yearns, and hoping is appeased.<br/></p>
				<p>But brief the space from one When to the other;<br/> Of my awaiting, say I, and the seeing<br/> The welkin grow resplendent more and more.<br/></p>
				<p>And Beatrice exclaimed: “Behold the hosts<br/> Of Christ’s triumphal march, and all the fruit<br/> Harvested by the rolling of these spheres!”<br/></p>
				<p>It seemed to me her face was all aflame;<br/> And eyes she had so full of ecstasy<br/> That I must needs pass on without describing.<br/></p>
				<p>As when in nights serene of the full moon<br/> Smiles Trivia among the nymphs eternal<br/> Who paint the firmament through all its gulfs,<br/></p>
				<p>Saw I, above the myriads of lamps,<br/> A Sun that one and all of them enkindled,<br/> E’en as our own doth the supernal sights,<br/></p>
				<p>And through the living light transparent shone<br/> The lucent substance so intensely clear<br/> Into my sight, that I sustained it not.<br/></p>
				<p>O Beatrice, thou gentle guide and dear!<br/> To me she said: “What overmasters thee<br/> A virtue is from which naught shields itself.<br/></p>
				<p>There are the wisdom and the omnipotence<br/> That oped the thoroughfares ’twixt heaven and earth,<br/> For which there erst had been so long a yearning.”<br/></p>
				<p>As fire from out a cloud unlocks itself,<br/> Dilating so it finds not room therein,<br/> And down, against its nature, falls to earth,<br/></p>
				<p>So did my mind, among those aliments<br/> Becoming larger, issue from itself,<br/> And that which it became cannot remember.<br/></p>
				<p>“Open thine eyes, and look at what I am:<br/> Thou hast beheld such things, that strong enough<br/> Hast thou become to tolerate my smile.”<br/></p>
				<p>I was as one who still retains the feeling<br/> Of a forgotten vision, and endeavours<br/> In vain to bring it back into his mind,<br/></p>
				<p>When I this invitation heard, deserving<br/> Of so much gratitude, it never fades<br/> Out of the book that chronicles the past.<br/></p>
				<p>If at this moment sounded all the tongues<br/> That Polyhymnia and her sisters made<br/> Most lubrical with their delicious milk,<br/></p>
				<p>To aid me, to a thousandth of the truth<br/> It would not reach, singing the holy smile<br/> And how the holy aspect it illumed.<br/></p>
				<p>And therefore, representing Paradise,<br/> The sacred poem must perforce leap over,<br/> Even as a man who finds his way cut off;<br/></p>
				<p>But whoso thinketh of the ponderous theme,<br/> And of the mortal shoulder laden with it,<br/> Should blame it not, if under this it tremble.<br/></p>
				<p>It is no passage for a little boat<br/> This which goes cleaving the audacious prow,<br/> Nor for a pilot who would spare himself.<br/></p>
				<p>“Why doth my face so much enamour thee,<br/> That to the garden fair thou turnest not,<br/> Which under the rays of Christ is blossoming?<br/></p>
				<p>There is the Rose in which the Word Divine<br/> Became incarnate; there the lilies are<br/> By whose perfume the good way was discovered.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus Beatrice; and I, who to her counsels<br/> Was wholly ready, once again betook me<br/> Unto the battle of the feeble brows.<br/></p>
				<p>As in the sunshine, that unsullied streams<br/> Through fractured cloud, ere now a meadow of flowers<br/> Mine eyes with shadow covered o’er have seen,<br/></p>
				<p>So troops of splendours manifold I saw<br/> Illumined from above with burning rays,<br/> Beholding not the source of the effulgence.<br/></p>
				<p>O power benignant that dost so imprint them!<br/> Thou didst exalt thyself to give more scope<br/> There to mine eyes, that were not strong enough.<br/></p>
				<p>The name of that fair flower I e’er invoke<br/> Morning and evening utterly enthralled<br/> My soul to gaze upon the greater fire.<br/></p>
				<p>And when in both mine eyes depicted were<br/> The glory and greatness of the living star<br/> Which there excelleth, as it here excelled,<br/></p>
				<p>Athwart the heavens a little torch descended<br/> Formed in a circle like a coronal,<br/> And cinctured it, and whirled itself about it.<br/></p>
				<p>Whatever melody most sweetly soundeth<br/> On earth, and to itself most draws the soul,<br/> Would seem a cloud that, rent asunder, thunders,<br/></p>
				<p>Compared unto the sounding of that lyre<br/> Wherewith was crowned the sapphire beautiful,<br/> Which gives the clearest heaven its sapphire hue.<br/></p>
				<p>“I am Angelic Love, that circle round<br/> The joy sublime which breathes from out the womb<br/> That was the hostelry of our Desire;<br/></p>
				<p>And I shall circle, Lady of Heaven, while<br/> Thou followest thy Son, and mak’st diviner<br/> The sphere supreme, because thou enterest there.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did the circulated melody<br/> Seal itself up; and all the other lights<br/> Were making to resound the name of Mary.<br/></p>
				<p>The regal mantle of the volumes all<br/> Of that world, which most fervid is and living<br/> With breath of God and with his works and ways,<br/></p>
				<p>Extended over us its inner border,<br/> So very distant, that the semblance of it<br/> There where I was not yet appeared to me.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore mine eyes did not possess the power<br/> Of following the incoronated flame,<br/> Which mounted upward near to its own seed.<br/></p>
				<p>And as a little child, that towards its mother<br/> Stretches its arms, when it the milk has taken,<br/> Through impulse kindled into outward flame,<br/></p>
				<p>Each of those gleams of whiteness upward reached<br/> So with its summit, that the deep affection<br/> They had for Mary was revealed to me.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafter they remained there in my sight,<br/> ‘Regina coeli’ singing with such sweetness,<br/> That ne’er from me has the delight departed.<br/></p>
				<p>O, what exuberance is garnered up<br/> Within those richest coffers, which had been<br/> Good husbandmen for sowing here below!<br/></p>
				<p>There they enjoy and live upon the treasure<br/> Which was acquired while weeping in the exile<br/> Of Babylon, wherein the gold was left.<br/></p>
				<p>There triumpheth, beneath the exalted Son<br/> Of God and Mary, in his victory,<br/> Both with the ancient council and the new,<br/></p>
				<p>He who doth keep the keys of such a glory.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-24" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter examines Dante upon Faith</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“O company elect to the great supper<br/> Of the Lamb benedight, who feedeth you<br/> So that for ever full is your desire,<br/></p>
				<p>If by the grace of God this man foretaste<br/> Something of that which falleth from your table,<br/> Or ever death prescribe to him the time,<br/></p>
				<p>Direct your mind to his immense desire,<br/> And him somewhat bedew; ye drinking are<br/> For ever at the fount whence comes his thought.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus Beatrice; and those souls beatified<br/> Transformed themselves to spheres on steadfast poles,<br/> Flaming intensely in the guise of comets.<br/></p>
				<p>And as the wheels in works of horologes<br/> Revolve so that the first to the beholder<br/> Motionless seems, and the last one to fly,<br/></p>
				<p>So in like manner did those carols, dancing<br/> In different measure, of their affluence<br/> Give me the gauge, as they were swift or slow.<br/></p>
				<p>From that one which I noted of most beauty<br/> Beheld I issue forth a fire so happy<br/> That none it left there of a greater brightness;<br/></p>
				<p>And around Beatrice three several times<br/> It whirled itself with so divine a song,<br/> My fantasy repeats it not to me;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore the pen skips, and I write it not,<br/> Since our imagination for such folds,<br/> Much more our speech, is of a tint too glaring.<br/></p>
				<p>“O holy sister mine, who us implorest<br/> With such devotion, by thine ardent love<br/> Thou dost unbind me from that beautiful sphere!”<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafter, having stopped, the blessed fire<br/> Unto my Lady did direct its breath,<br/> Which spake in fashion as I here have said.<br/></p>
				<p>And she: “O light eterne of the great man<br/> To whom our Lord delivered up the keys<br/> He carried down of this miraculous joy,<br/></p>
				<p>This one examine on points light and grave,<br/> As good beseemeth thee, about the Faith<br/> By means of which thou on the sea didst walk.<br/></p>
				<p>If he love well, and hope well, and believe,<br/> From thee ’tis hid not; for thou hast thy sight<br/> There where depicted everything is seen.<br/></p>
				<p>But since this kingdom has made citizens<br/> By means of the true Faith, to glorify it<br/> ’Tis well he have the chance to speak thereof.”<br/></p>
				<p>As baccalaureate arms himself, and speaks not<br/> Until the master doth propose the question,<br/> To argue it, and not to terminate it,<br/></p>
				<p>So did I arm myself with every reason,<br/> While she was speaking, that I might be ready<br/> For such a questioner and such profession.<br/></p>
				<p>“Say, thou good Christian; manifest thyself;<br/> What is the Faith?” Whereat I raised my brow<br/> Unto that light wherefrom was this breathed forth.<br/></p>
				<p>Then turned I round to Beatrice, and she<br/> Prompt signals made to me that I should pour<br/> The water forth from my internal fountain.<br/></p>
				<p>“May grace, that suffers me to make confession,”<br/> Began I, “to the great centurion,<br/> Cause my conceptions all to be explicit!”<br/></p>
				<p>And I continued: “As the truthful pen,<br/> Father, of thy dear brother wrote of it,<br/> Who put with thee Rome into the good way,<br/></p>
				<p>Faith is the substance of the things we hope for,<br/> And evidence of those that are not seen;<br/> And this appears to me its quiddity.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then heard I: “Very rightly thou perceivest,<br/> If well thou understandest why he placed it<br/> With substances and then with evidences.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I thereafterward: “The things profound,<br/> That here vouchsafe to me their apparition,<br/> Unto all eyes below are so concealed,<br/></p>
				<p>That they exist there only in belief,<br/> Upon the which is founded the high hope,<br/> And hence it takes the nature of a substance.<br/></p>
				<p>And it behoveth us from this belief<br/> To reason without having other sight,<br/> And hence it has the nature of evidence.”<br/></p>
				<p>Then heard I: “If whatever is acquired<br/> Below by doctrine were thus understood,<br/> No sophist’s subtlety would there find place.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus was breathed forth from that enkindled love;<br/> Then added: “Very well has been gone over<br/> Already of this coin the alloy and weight;<br/></p>
				<p>But tell me if thou hast it in thy purse?”<br/> And I: “Yes, both so shining and so round<br/> That in its stamp there is no peradventure.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafter issued from the light profound<br/> That there resplendent was: “This precious jewel,<br/> Upon the which is every virtue founded,<br/></p>
				<p>Whence hadst thou it?” And I: “The large outpouring<br/> Of Holy Spirit, which has been diffused<br/> Upon the ancient parchments and the new,<br/></p>
				<p>A syllogism is, which proved it to me<br/> With such acuteness, that, compared therewith,<br/> All demonstration seems to me obtuse.”<br/></p>
				<p>And then I heard: “The ancient and the new<br/> Postulates, that to thee are so conclusive,<br/> Why dost thou take them for the word divine?”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “The proofs, which show the truth to me,<br/> Are the works subsequent, whereunto Nature<br/> Ne’er heated iron yet, nor anvil beat.”<br/></p>
				<p>’Twas answered me: “Say, who assureth thee<br/> That those works ever were? the thing itself<br/> That must be proved, nought else to thee affirms it.”<br/></p>
				<p>“Were the world to Christianity converted,”<br/> I said, “withouten miracles, this one<br/> Is such, the rest are not its hundredth part;<br/></p>
				<p>Because that poor and fasting thou didst enter<br/> Into the field to sow there the good plant,<br/> Which was a vine and has become a thorn!”<br/></p>
				<p>This being finished, the high, holy Court<br/> Resounded through the spheres, “One God we praise!”<br/> In melody that there above is chanted.<br/></p>
				<p>And then that Baron, who from branch to branch,<br/> Examining, had thus conducted me,<br/> Till the extremest leaves we were approaching,<br/></p>
				<p>Again began: “The Grace that dallying<br/> Plays with thine intellect thy mouth has opened,<br/> Up to this point, as it should opened be,<br/></p>
				<p>So that I do approve what forth emerged;<br/> But now thou must express what thou believest,<br/> And whence to thy belief it was presented.”<br/></p>
				<p>“O holy father, spirit who beholdest<br/> What thou believedst so that thou o’ercamest,<br/> Towards the sepulchre, more youthful feet,”<br/></p>
				<p>Began I, “thou dost wish me in this place<br/> The form to manifest of my prompt belief,<br/> And likewise thou the cause thereof demandest.<br/></p>
				<p>And I respond: In one God I believe,<br/> Sole and eterne, who moveth all the heavens<br/> With love and with desire, himself unmoved;<br/></p>
				<p>And of such faith not only have I proofs<br/> Physical and metaphysical, but gives them<br/> Likewise the truth that from this place rains down<br/></p>
				<p>Through Moses, through the Prophets and the Psalms,<br/> Through the Evangel, and through you, who wrote<br/> After the fiery Spirit sanctified you;<br/></p>
				<p>In Persons three eterne believe, and these<br/> One essence I believe, so one and trine<br/> They bear conjunction both with ‘sunt’ and ‘est.’<br/></p>
				<p>With the profound condition and divine<br/> Which now I touch upon, doth stamp my mind<br/> Ofttimes the doctrine evangelical.<br/></p>
				<p>This the beginning is, this is the spark<br/> Which afterwards dilates to vivid flame,<br/> And, like a star in heaven, is sparkling in me.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a lord who hears what pleaseth him<br/> His servant straight embraces, gratulating<br/> For the good news as soon as he is silent;<br/></p>
				<p>So, giving me its benediction, singing,<br/> Three times encircled me, when I was silent,<br/> The apostolic light, at whose command<br/></p>
				<p>I spoken had, in speaking I so pleased him.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-25" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> James examines Dante upon Hope</span>
				</h3>
				<p>If e’er it happen that the Poem Sacred,<br/> To which both heaven and earth have set their hand,<br/> So that it many a year hath made me lean,<br/></p>
				<p>O’ercome the cruelty that bars me out<br/> From the fair sheepfold, where a lamb I slumbered,<br/> An enemy to the wolves that war upon it,<br/></p>
				<p>With other voice forthwith, with other fleece<br/> Poet will I return, and at my font<br/> Baptismal will I take the laurel crown;<br/></p>
				<p>Because into the Faith that maketh known<br/> All souls to God there entered I, and then<br/> Peter for her sake thus my brow encircled.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafterward towards us moved a light<br/> Out of that band whence issued the first-fruits<br/> Which of his vicars Christ behind him left,<br/></p>
				<p>And then my Lady, full of ecstasy,<br/> Said unto me: “Look, look! behold the Baron<br/> For whom below Galicia is frequented.”<br/></p>
				<p>In the same way as, when a dove alights<br/> Near his companion, both of them pour forth,<br/> Circling about and murmuring, their affection,<br/></p>
				<p>So one beheld I by the other grand<br/> Prince glorified to be with welcome greeted,<br/> Lauding the food that there above is eaten.<br/></p>
				<p>But when their gratulations were complete,<br/> Silently ‘coram me’ each one stood still,<br/> So incandescent it o’ercame my sight.<br/></p>
				<p>Smiling thereafterwards, said Beatrice:<br/> “Illustrious life, by whom the benefactions<br/> Of our Basilica have been described,<br/></p>
				<p>Make Hope resound within this altitude;<br/> Thou knowest as oft thou dost personify it<br/> As Jesus to the three gave greater clearness.”⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>“Lift up thy head, and make thyself assured;<br/> For what comes hither from the mortal world<br/> Must needs be ripened in our radiance.”<br/></p>
				<p>This comfort came to me from the second fire;<br/> Wherefore mine eyes I lifted to the hills,<br/> Which bent them down before with too great weight.<br/></p>
				<p>“Since, through his grace, our Emperor wills that thou<br/> Shouldst find thee face to face, before thy death,<br/> In the most secret chamber, with his Counts,<br/></p>
				<p>So that, the truth beholden of this court,<br/> Hope, which below there rightfully enamours,<br/> Thereby thou strengthen in thyself and others,<br/></p>
				<p>Say what it is, and how is flowering with it<br/> Thy mind, and say from whence it came to thee.”<br/> Thus did the second light again continue.<br/></p>
				<p>And the Compassionate, who piloted<br/> The plumage of my wings in such high flight,<br/> Did in reply anticipate me thus:<br/></p>
				<p>“No child whatever the Church Militant<br/> Of greater hope possesses, as is written<br/> In that Sun which irradiates all our band;<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore it is conceded him from Egypt<br/> To come into Jerusalem to see,<br/> Or ever yet his warfare be completed.<br/></p>
				<p>The two remaining points, that not for knowledge<br/> Have been demanded, but that he report<br/> How much this virtue unto thee is pleasing,<br/></p>
				<p>To him I leave; for hard he will not find them,<br/> Nor of self-praise; and let him answer them;<br/> And may the grace of God in this assist him!”<br/></p>
				<p>As a disciple, who his teacher follows,<br/> Ready and willing, where he is expert,<br/> That his proficiency may be displayed,<br/></p>
				<p>“Hope,” said I, “is the certain expectation<br/> Of future glory, which is the effect<br/> Of grace divine and merit precedent.<br/></p>
				<p>From many stars this light comes unto me;<br/> But he instilled it first into my heart<br/> Who was chief singer unto the chief captain.<br/></p>
				<p>‘Sperent in te,’ in the high Theody<br/> He sayeth, ‘those who know thy name;’ and who<br/> Knoweth it not, if he my faith possess?<br/></p>
				<p>Thou didst instil me, then, with his instilling<br/> In the Epistle, so that I am full,<br/> And upon others rain again your rain.”<br/></p>
				<p>While I was speaking, in the living bosom<br/> Of that combustion quivered an effulgence,<br/> Sudden and frequent, in the guise of lightning;<br/></p>
				<p>Then breathed: “The love wherewith I am inflamed<br/> Towards the virtue still which followed me<br/> Unto the palm and issue of the field,<br/></p>
				<p>Wills that I breathe to thee that thou delight<br/> In her; and grateful to me is thy telling<br/> Whatever things Hope promises to thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “The ancient Scriptures and the new<br/> The mark establish, and this shows it me,<br/> Of all the souls whom God hath made his friends.<br/></p>
				<p>Isaiah saith, that each one garmented<br/> In his own land shall be with twofold garments,<br/> And his own land is this delightful life.<br/></p>
				<p>Thy brother, too, far more explicitly,<br/> There where he treateth of the robes of white,<br/> This revelation manifests to us.”<br/></p>
				<p>And first, and near the ending of these words,<br/> “Sperent in te” from over us was heard,<br/> To which responsive answered all the carols.<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafterward a light among them brightened,<br/> So that, if Cancer one such crystal had,<br/> Winter would have a month of one sole day.<br/></p>
				<p>And as uprises, goes, and enters the dance<br/> A winsome maiden, only to do honour<br/> To the new bride, and not from any failing,<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus did I behold the brightened splendour<br/> Approach the two, who in a wheel revolved<br/> As was beseeming to their ardent love.<br/></p>
				<p>Into the song and music there it entered;<br/> And fixed on them my Lady kept her look,<br/> Even as a bride silent and motionless.<br/></p>
				<p>“This is the one who lay upon the breast<br/> Of him our Pelican; and this is he<br/> To the great office from the cross elected.”<br/></p>
				<p>My Lady thus; but therefore none the more<br/> Did move her sight from its attentive gaze<br/> Before or afterward these words of hers.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a man who gazes, and endeavours<br/> To see the eclipsing of the sun a little,<br/> And who, by seeing, sightless doth become,<br/></p>
				<p>So I became before that latest fire,<br/> While it was said, “Why dost thou daze thyself<br/> To see a thing which here hath no existence?<br/></p>
				<p>Earth in the earth my body is, and shall be<br/> With all the others there, until our number<br/> With the eternal proposition tallies.<br/></p>
				<p>With the two garments in the blessed cloister<br/> Are the two lights alone that have ascended:<br/> And this shalt thou take back into your world.”<br/></p>
				<p>And at this utterance the flaming circle<br/> Grew quiet, with the dulcet intermingling<br/> Of sound that by the trinal breath was made,<br/></p>
				<p>As to escape from danger or fatigue<br/> The oars that erst were in the water beaten<br/> Are all suspended at a whistle’s sound.<br/></p>
				<p>Ah, how much in my mind was I disturbed,<br/> When I turned round to look on Beatrice,<br/> That her I could not see, although I was<br/></p>
				<p>Close at her side and in the Happy World!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-26" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> John examines Dante upon Charity</span>
				</h3>
				<p>While I was doubting for my vision quenched,<br/> Out of the flame refulgent that had quenched it<br/> Issued a breathing, that attentive made me,<br/></p>
				<p>Saying: “While thou recoverest the sense<br/> Of seeing which in me thou hast consumed,<br/> ’Tis well that speaking thou shouldst compensate it.<br/></p>
				<p>Begin then, and declare to what thy soul<br/> Is aimed, and count it for a certainty,<br/> Sight is in thee bewildered and not dead;<br/></p>
				<p>Because the Lady, who through this divine<br/> Region conducteth thee, has in her look<br/> The power the hand of Ananias had.”<br/></p>
				<p>I said: “As pleaseth her, or soon or late<br/> Let the cure come to eyes that portals were<br/> When she with fire I ever burn with entered.<br/></p>
				<p>The Good, that gives contentment to this Court,<br/> The Alpha and Omega is of all<br/> The writing that love reads me low or loud.”<br/></p>
				<p>The selfsame voice, that taken had from me<br/> The terror of the sudden dazzlement,<br/> To speak still farther put it in my thought;<br/></p>
				<p>And said: “In verity with finer sieve<br/> Behoveth thee to sift; thee it behoveth<br/> To say who aimed thy bow at such a target.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I: “By philosophic arguments,<br/> And by authority that hence descends,<br/> Such love must needs imprint itself in me;<br/></p>
				<p>For Good, so far as good, when comprehended<br/> Doth straight enkindle love, and so much greater<br/> As more of goodness in itself it holds;<br/></p>
				<p>Then to that Essence (whose is such advantage<br/> That every good which out of it is found<br/> Is nothing but a ray of its own light)<br/></p>
				<p>More than elsewhither must the mind be moved<br/> Of every one, in loving, who discerns<br/> The truth in which this evidence is founded.<br/></p>
				<p>Such truth he to my intellect reveals<br/> Who demonstrates to me the primal love<br/> Of all the sempiternal substances.<br/></p>
				<p>The voice reveals it of the truthful Author,<br/> Who says to Moses, speaking of Himself,<br/> ‘I will make all my goodness pass before thee.’<br/></p>
				<p>Thou too revealest it to me, beginning<br/> The loud Evangel, that proclaims the secret<br/> Of heaven to earth above all other edict.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I heard say: “By human intellect<br/> And by authority concordant with it,<br/> Of all thy loves reserve for God the highest.<br/></p>
				<p>But say again if other cords thou feelest,<br/> Draw thee towards Him, that thou mayst proclaim<br/> With how many teeth this love is biting thee.”<br/></p>
				<p>The holy purpose of the Eagle of Christ<br/> Not latent was, nay, rather I perceived<br/> Whither he fain would my profession lead.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore I recommenced: “All of those bites<br/> Which have the power to turn the heart to God<br/> Unto my charity have been concurrent.<br/></p>
				<p>The being of the world, and my own being,<br/> The death which He endured that I may live,<br/> And that which all the faithful hope, as I do,<br/></p>
				<p>With the forementioned vivid consciousness<br/> Have drawn me from the sea of love perverse,<br/> And of the right have placed me on the shore.<br/></p>
				<p>The leaves, wherewith embowered is all the garden<br/> Of the Eternal Gardener, do I love<br/> As much as he has granted them of good.”<br/></p>
				<p>As soon as I had ceased, a song most sweet<br/> Throughout the heaven resounded, and my Lady<br/> Said with the others, “Holy, holy, holy!”<br/></p>
				<p>And as at some keen light one wakes from sleep<br/> By reason of the visual spirit that runs<br/> Unto the splendour passed from coat to coat,<br/></p>
				<p>And he who wakes abhorreth what he sees,<br/> So all unconscious is his sudden waking,<br/> Until the judgment cometh to his aid,<br/></p>
				<p>So from before mine eyes did Beatrice<br/> Chase every mote with radiance of her own,<br/> That cast its light a thousand miles and more.<br/></p>
				<p>Whence better after than before I saw,<br/> And in a kind of wonderment I asked<br/> About a fourth light that I saw with us.<br/></p>
				<p>And said my Lady: “There within those rays<br/> Gazes upon its Maker the first soul<br/> That ever the first virtue did create.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as the bough that downward bends its top<br/> At transit of the wind, and then is lifted<br/> By its own virtue, which inclines it upward,<br/></p>
				<p>Likewise did I, the while that she was speaking,<br/> Being amazed, and then I was made bold<br/> By a desire to speak wherewith I burned.<br/></p>
				<p>And I began: “O apple, that mature<br/> Alone hast been produced, O ancient father,<br/> To whom each wife is daughter and daughter-in-law,<br/></p>
				<p>Devoutly as I can I supplicate thee<br/> That thou wouldst speak to me; thou seest my wish;<br/> And I, to hear thee quickly, speak it not.”<br/></p>
				<p>Sometimes an animal, when covered, struggles<br/> So that his impulse needs must be apparent,<br/> By reason of the wrappage following it;<br/></p>
				<p>And in like manner the primeval soul<br/> Made clear to me athwart its covering<br/> How jubilant it was to give me pleasure.<br/></p>
				<p>Then breathed: “Without thy uttering it to me,<br/> Thine inclination better I discern<br/> Than thou whatever thing is surest to thee;<br/></p>
				<p>For I behold it in the truthful mirror,<br/> That of Himself all things parhelion makes,<br/> And none makes Him parhelion of itself.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou fain wouldst hear how long ago God placed me<br/> Within the lofty garden, where this Lady<br/> Unto so long a stairway thee disposed.<br/></p>
				<p>And how long to mine eyes it was a pleasure,<br/> And of the great disdain the proper cause,<br/> And the language that I used and that I made.<br/></p>
				<p>Now, son of mine, the tasting of the tree<br/> Not in itself was cause of so great exile,<br/> But solely the o’erstepping of the bounds.<br/></p>
				<p>There, whence thy Lady moved Virgilius,<br/> Four thousand and three hundred and two circuits<br/> Made by the sun, this Council I desired;<br/></p>
				<p>And him I saw return to all the lights<br/> Of his highway nine hundred times and thirty,<br/> Whilst I upon the earth was tarrying.<br/></p>
				<p>The language that I spake was quite extinct<br/> Before that in the work interminable<br/> The people under Nimrod were employed;<br/></p>
				<p>For nevermore result of reasoning<br/> (Because of human pleasure that doth change,<br/> Obedient to the heavens) was durable.<br/></p>
				<p>A natural action is it that man speaks;<br/> But whether thus or thus, doth nature leave<br/> To your own art, as seemeth best to you.<br/></p>
				<p>Ere I descended to the infernal anguish,<br/> ‘El’ was on earth the name of the Chief Good,<br/> From whom comes all the joy that wraps me round<br/></p>
				<p>‘Eli’ he then was called, and that is proper,<br/> Because the use of men is like a leaf<br/> On bough, which goeth and another cometh.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon the mount that highest o’er the wave<br/> Rises was I, in life or pure or sinful,<br/> From the first hour to that which is the second,<br/></p>
				<p>As the sun changes quadrant, to the sixth.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-27" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s reproof of bad Popes.⁠—The Ascent to the Ninth Heaven, or the Primum Mobile</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“Glory be to the Father, to the Son,<br/> And Holy Ghost!” all Paradise began,<br/> So that the melody inebriate made me.<br/></p>
				<p>What I beheld seemed unto me a smile<br/> Of the universe; for my inebriation<br/> Found entrance through the hearing and the sight.<br/></p>
				<p>O joy! O gladness inexpressible!<br/> O perfect life of love and peacefulness!<br/> O riches without hankering secure!<br/></p>
				<p>Before mine eyes were standing the four torches<br/> Enkindled, and the one that first had come<br/> Began to make itself more luminous;<br/></p>
				<p>And even such in semblance it became<br/> As Jupiter would become, if he and Mars<br/> Were birds, and they should interchange their feathers.<br/></p>
				<p>That Providence, which here distributeth<br/> Season and service, in the blessed choir<br/> Had silence upon every side imposed.<br/></p>
				<p>When I heard say: “If I my colour change,<br/> Marvel not at it; for while I am speaking<br/> Thou shalt behold all these their colour change.<br/></p>
				<p>He who usurps upon the earth my place,<br/> My place, my place, which vacant has become<br/> Before the presence of the Son of God,<br/></p>
				<p>Has of my cemetery made a sewer<br/> Of blood and stench, whereby the Perverse One,<br/> Who fell from here, below there is appeased!”<br/></p>
				<p>With the same colour which, through sun adverse,<br/> Painteth the clouds at evening or at morn,<br/> Beheld I then the whole of heaven suffused.<br/></p>
				<p>And as a modest woman, who abides<br/> Sure of herself, and at another’s failing,<br/> From listening only, timorous becomes,<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus did Beatrice change countenance;<br/> And I believe in heaven was such eclipse,<br/> When suffered the supreme Omnipotence;<br/></p>
				<p>Thereafterward proceeded forth his words<br/> With voice so much transmuted from itself,<br/> The very countenance was not more changed.<br/></p>
				<p>“The spouse of Christ has never nurtured been<br/> On blood of mine, of Linus and of Cletus,<br/> To be made use of in acquest of gold;<br/></p>
				<p>But in acquest of this delightful life<br/> Sixtus and Pius, Urban and Calixtus,<br/> After much lamentation, shed their blood.<br/></p>
				<p>Our purpose was not, that on the right hand<br/> Of our successors should in part be seated<br/> The Christian folk, in part upon the other;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor that the keys which were to me confided<br/> Should e’er become the escutcheon on a banner,<br/> That should wage war on those who are baptized;<br/></p>
				<p>Nor I be made the figure of a seal<br/> To privileges venal and mendacious,<br/> Whereat I often redden and flash with fire.<br/></p>
				<p>In garb of shepherds the rapacious wolves<br/> Are seen from here above o’er all the pastures!<br/> O wrath of God, why dost thou slumber still?<br/></p>
				<p>To drink our blood the Caorsines and Gascons<br/> Are making ready. O thou good beginning,<br/> Unto how vile an end must thou needs fall!<br/></p>
				<p>But the high Providence, that with Scipio<br/> At Rome the glory of the world defended,<br/> Will speedily bring aid, as I conceive;<br/></p>
				<p>And thou, my son, who by thy mortal weight<br/> Shalt down return again, open thy mouth;<br/> What I conceal not, do not thou conceal.”<br/></p>
				<p>As with its frozen vapours downward falls<br/> In flakes our atmosphere, what time the horn<br/> Of the celestial Goat doth touch the sun,<br/></p>
				<p>Upward in such array saw I the ether<br/> Become, and flaked with the triumphant vapours,<br/> Which there together with us had remained.<br/></p>
				<p>My sight was following up their semblances,<br/> And followed till the medium, by excess,<br/> The passing farther onward took from it;<br/></p>
				<p>Whereat the Lady, who beheld me freed<br/> From gazing upward, said to me: “Cast down<br/> Thy sight, and see how far thou art turned round.”<br/></p>
				<p>Since the first time that I had downward looked,<br/> I saw that I had moved through the whole arc<br/> Which the first climate makes from midst to end;<br/></p>
				<p>So that I saw the mad track of Ulysses<br/> Past Gades, and this side, well nigh the shore<br/> Whereon became Europa a sweet burden.<br/></p>
				<p>And of this threshing-floor the site to me<br/> Were more unveiled, but the sun was proceeding<br/> Under my feet, a sign and more removed.<br/></p>
				<p>My mind enamoured, which is dallying<br/> At all times with my Lady, to bring back<br/> To her mine eyes was more than ever ardent.<br/></p>
				<p>And if or Art or Nature has made bait<br/> To catch the eyes and so possess the mind,<br/> In human flesh or in its portraiture,<br/></p>
				<p>All joined together would appear as nought<br/> To the divine delight which shone upon me<br/> When to her smiling face I turned me round.<br/></p>
				<p>The virtue that her look endowed me with<br/> From the fair nest of Leda tore me forth,<br/> And up into the swiftest heaven impelled me.<br/></p>
				<p>Its parts exceeding full of life and lofty<br/> Are all so uniform, I cannot say<br/> Which Beatrice selected for my place.<br/></p>
				<p>But she, who was aware of my desire,<br/> Began, the while she smiled so joyously<br/> That God seemed in her countenance to rejoice:<br/></p>
				<p>“The nature of that motion, which keeps quiet<br/> The centre and all the rest about it moves,<br/> From hence begins as from its starting point.<br/></p>
				<p>And in this heaven there is no other Where<br/> Than in the Mind Divine, wherein is kindled<br/> The love that turns it, and the power it rains.<br/></p>
				<p>Within a circle light and love embrace it,<br/> Even as this doth the others, and that precinct<br/> He who encircles it alone controls.<br/></p>
				<p>Its motion is not by another meted,<br/> But all the others measured are by this,<br/> As ten is by the half and by the fifth.<br/></p>
				<p>And in what manner time in such a pot<br/> May have its roots, and in the rest its leaves,<br/> Now unto thee can manifest be made.<br/></p>
				<p>O Covetousness, that mortals dost ingulf<br/> Beneath thee so, that no one hath the power<br/> Of drawing back his eyes from out thy waves!<br/></p>
				<p>Full fairly blossoms in mankind the will;<br/> But the uninterrupted rain converts<br/> Into abortive wildings the true plums.<br/></p>
				<p>Fidelity and innocence are found<br/> Only in children; afterwards they both<br/> Take flight or e’er the cheeks with down are covered.<br/></p>
				<p>One, while he prattles still, observes the fasts,<br/> Who, when his tongue is loosed, forthwith devours<br/> Whatever food under whatever moon;<br/></p>
				<p>Another, while he prattles, loves and listens<br/> Unto his mother, who when speech is perfect<br/> Forthwith desires to see her in her grave.<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus is swarthy made the skin so white<br/> In its first aspect of the daughter fair<br/> Of him who brings the morn, and leaves the night.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou, that it may not be a marvel to thee,<br/> Think that on earth there is no one who governs;<br/> Whence goes astray the human family.<br/></p>
				<p>Ere January be unwintered wholly<br/> By the centesimal on earth neglected,<br/> Shall these supernal circles roar so loud<br/></p>
				<p>The tempest that has been so long awaited<br/> Shall whirl the poops about where are the prows;<br/> So that the fleet shall run its course direct,<br/></p>
				<p>And the true fruit shall follow on the flower.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-28" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">God and the Celestial Hierarchies</span>
				</h3>
				<p>After the truth against the present life<br/> Of miserable mortals was unfolded<br/> By her who doth imparadise my mind,<br/></p>
				<p>As in a looking-glass a taper’s flame<br/> He sees who from behind is lighted by it,<br/> Before he has it in his sight or thought,<br/></p>
				<p>And turns him round to see if so the glass<br/> Tell him the truth, and sees that it accords<br/> Therewith as doth a music with its metre,<br/></p>
				<p>In similar wise my memory recollecteth<br/> That I did, looking into those fair eyes,<br/> Of which Love made the springes to ensnare me.<br/></p>
				<p>And as I turned me round, and mine were touched<br/> By that which is apparent in that volume,<br/> Whenever on its gyre we gaze intent,<br/></p>
				<p>A point beheld I, that was raying out<br/> Light so acute, the sight which it enkindles<br/> Must close perforce before such great acuteness.<br/></p>
				<p>And whatsoever star seems smallest here<br/> Would seem to be a moon, if placed beside it.<br/> As one star with another star is placed.<br/></p>
				<p>Perhaps at such a distance as appears<br/> A halo cincturing the light that paints it,<br/> When densest is the vapour that sustains it,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus distant round the point a circle of fire<br/> So swiftly whirled, that it would have surpassed<br/> Whatever motion soonest girds the world;<br/></p>
				<p>And this was by another circumcinct,<br/> That by a third, the third then by a fourth,<br/> By a fifth the fourth, and then by a sixth the fifth;<br/></p>
				<p>The seventh followed thereupon in width<br/> So ample now, that Juno’s messenger<br/> Entire would be too narrow to contain it.<br/></p>
				<p>Even so the eighth and ninth; and every one<br/> More slowly moved, according as it was<br/> In number distant farther from the first.<br/></p>
				<p>And that one had its flame most crystalline<br/> From which less distant was the stainless spark,<br/> I think because more with its truth imbued.<br/></p>
				<p>My Lady, who in my anxiety<br/> Beheld me much perplexed, said: “From that point<br/> Dependent is the heaven and nature all.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold that circle most conjoined to it,<br/> And know thou, that its motion is so swift<br/> Through burning love whereby it is spurred on.”<br/></p>
				<p>And I to her: “If the world were arranged<br/> In the order which I see in yonder wheels,<br/> What’s set before me would have satisfied me;<br/></p>
				<p>But in the world of sense we can perceive<br/> That evermore the circles are diviner<br/> As they are from the centre more remote<br/></p>
				<p>Wherefore if my desire is to be ended<br/> In this miraculous and angelic temple,<br/> That has for confines only love and light,<br/></p>
				<p>To hear behoves me still how the example<br/> And the exemplar go not in one fashion,<br/> Since for myself in vain I contemplate it.”<br/></p>
				<p>“If thine own fingers unto such a knot<br/> Be insufficient, it is no great wonder,<br/> So hard hath it become for want of trying.”<br/></p>
				<p>My Lady thus; then said she: “Do thou take<br/> What I shall tell thee, if thou wouldst be sated,<br/> And exercise on that thy subtlety.<br/></p>
				<p>The circles corporal are wide and narrow<br/> According to the more or less of virtue<br/> Which is distributed through all their parts.<br/></p>
				<p>The greater goodness works the greater weal,<br/> The greater weal the greater body holds,<br/> If perfect equally are all its parts.<br/></p>
				<p>Therefore this one which sweeps along with it<br/> The universe sublime, doth correspond<br/> Unto the circle which most loves and knows.<br/></p>
				<p>On which account, if thou unto the virtue<br/> Apply thy measure, not to the appearance<br/> Of substances that unto thee seem round,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou wilt behold a marvellous agreement,<br/> Of more to greater, and of less to smaller,<br/> In every heaven, with its Intelligence.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as remaineth splendid and serene<br/> The hemisphere of air, when Boreas<br/> Is blowing from that cheek where he is mildest,<br/></p>
				<p>Because is purified and resolved the rack<br/> That erst disturbed it, till the welkin laughs<br/> With all the beauties of its pageantry;<br/></p>
				<p>Thus did I likewise, after that my Lady<br/> Had me provided with her clear response,<br/> And like a star in heaven the truth was seen.<br/></p>
				<p>And soon as to a stop her words had come,<br/> Not otherwise does iron scintillate<br/> When molten, than those circles scintillated.<br/></p>
				<p>Their coruscation all the sparks repeated,<br/> And they so many were, their number makes<br/> More millions than the doubling of the chess.<br/></p>
				<p>I heard them sing hosanna choir by choir<br/> To the fixed point which holds them at the ‘Ubi,’<br/> And ever will, where they have ever been.<br/></p>
				<p>And she, who saw the dubious meditations<br/> Within my mind, “The primal circles,” said,<br/> “Have shown thee Seraphim and Cherubim.<br/></p>
				<p>Thus rapidly they follow their own bonds,<br/> To be as like the point as most they can,<br/> And can as far as they are high in vision.<br/></p>
				<p>Those other Loves, that round about them go,<br/> Thrones of the countenance divine are called,<br/> Because they terminate the primal Triad.<br/></p>
				<p>And thou shouldst know that they all have delight<br/> As much as their own vision penetrates<br/> The Truth, in which all intellect finds rest.<br/></p>
				<p>From this it may be seen how blessedness<br/> Is founded in the faculty which sees,<br/> And not in that which loves, and follows next;<br/></p>
				<p>And of this seeing merit is the measure,<br/> Which is brought forth by grace, and by good will;<br/> Thus on from grade to grade doth it proceed.<br/></p>
				<p>The second Triad, which is germinating<br/> In such wise in this sempiternal spring,<br/> That no nocturnal Aries despoils,<br/></p>
				<p>Perpetually hosanna warbles forth<br/> With threefold melody, that sounds in three<br/> Orders of joy, with which it is intrined.<br/></p>
				<p>The three Divine are in this hierarchy,<br/> First the Dominions, and the Virtues next;<br/> And the third order is that of the Powers.<br/></p>
				<p>Then in the dances twain penultimate<br/> The Principalities and Archangels wheel;<br/> The last is wholly of angelic sports.<br/></p>
				<p>These orders upward all of them are gazing,<br/> And downward so prevail, that unto God<br/> They all attracted are and all attract.<br/></p>
				<p>And Dionysius with so great desire<br/> To contemplate these Orders set himself,<br/> He named them and distinguished them as I do.<br/></p>
				<p>But Gregory afterwards dissented from him;<br/> Wherefore, as soon as he unclosed his eyes<br/> Within this heaven, he at himself did smile.<br/></p>
				<p>And if so much of secret truth a mortal<br/> Proffered on earth, I would not have thee marvel,<br/> For he who saw it here revealed it to him,<br/></p>
				<p>With much more of the truth about these circles.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-29" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Beatrice’s Discourse of the Creation of the Angels, and of the Fall of Lucifer.⁠—Her Reproof of the Ignorance and Avarice of Preachers, and the Sale of Indulgences</span>
				</h3>
				<p>At what time both the children of Latona,<br/> Surmounted by the Ram and by the Scales,<br/> Together make a zone of the horizon,<br/></p>
				<p>As long as from the time the zenith holds them<br/> In equipoise, till from that girdle both<br/> Changing their hemisphere disturb the balance,<br/></p>
				<p>So long, her face depicted with a smile,<br/> Did Beatrice keep silence while she gazed<br/> Fixedly at the point which had o’ercome me.<br/></p>
				<p>Then she began: “I say, and I ask not<br/> What thou dost wish to hear, for I have seen it<br/> Where centres every When and every ‘Ubi.’<br/></p>
				<p>Not to acquire some good unto himself,<br/> Which is impossible, but that his splendour<br/> In its resplendency may say, ‘Subsisto,’<br/></p>
				<p>In his eternity outside of time,<br/> Outside all other limits, as it pleased him,<br/> Into new Loves the Eternal Love unfolded.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor as if torpid did he lie before;<br/> For neither after nor before proceeded<br/> The going forth of God upon these waters.<br/></p>
				<p>Matter and Form unmingled and conjoined<br/> Came into being that had no defect,<br/> E’en as three arrows from a three-stringed bow.<br/></p>
				<p>And as in glass, in amber, or in crystal<br/> A sunbeam flashes so, that from its coming<br/> To its full being is no interval,<br/></p>
				<p>So from its Lord did the triform effect<br/> Ray forth into its being all together,<br/> Without discrimination of beginning.<br/></p>
				<p>Order was con-created and constructed<br/> In substances, and summit of the world<br/> Were those wherein the pure act was produced.<br/></p>
				<p>Pure potentiality held the lowest part;<br/> Midway bound potentiality with act<br/> Such bond that it shall never be unbound.<br/></p>
				<p>Jerome has written unto you of angels<br/> Created a long lapse of centuries<br/> Or ever yet the other world was made;<br/></p>
				<p>But written is this truth in many places<br/> By writers of the Holy Ghost, and thou<br/> Shalt see it, if thou lookest well thereat.<br/></p>
				<p>And even reason seeth it somewhat,<br/> For it would not concede that for so long<br/> Could be the motors without their perfection.<br/></p>
				<p>Now dost thou know both where and when these Loves<br/> Created were, and how; so that extinct<br/> In thy desire already are three fires.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor could one reach, in counting, unto twenty<br/> So swiftly, as a portion of these angels<br/> Disturbed the subject of your elements.<br/></p>
				<p>The rest remained, and they began this art<br/> Which thou discernest, with so great delight<br/> That never from their circling do they cease.<br/></p>
				<p>The occasion of the fall was the accursed<br/> Presumption of that One, whom thou hast seen<br/> By all the burden of the world constrained.<br/></p>
				<p>Those whom thou here beholdest modest were<br/> To recognise themselves as of that goodness<br/> Which made them apt for so much understanding;<br/></p>
				<p>On which account their vision was exalted<br/> By the enlightening grace and their own merit,<br/> So that they have a full and steadfast will.<br/></p>
				<p>I would not have thee doubt, but certain be,<br/> ’Tis meritorious to receive this grace,<br/> According as the affection opens to it.<br/></p>
				<p>Now round about in this consistory<br/> Much mayst thou contemplate, if these my words<br/> Be gathered up, without all further aid.<br/></p>
				<p>But since upon the earth, throughout your schools,<br/> They teach that such is the angelic nature<br/> That it doth hear, and recollect, and will,<br/></p>
				<p>More will I say, that thou mayst see unmixed<br/> The truth that is confounded there below,<br/> Equivocating in such like prelections.<br/></p>
				<p>These substances, since in God’s countenance<br/> They jocund were, turned not away their sight<br/> From that wherefrom not anything is hidden;<br/></p>
				<p>Hence they have not their vision intercepted<br/> By object new, and hence they do not need<br/> To recollect, through interrupted thought.<br/></p>
				<p>So that below, not sleeping, people dream,<br/> Believing they speak truth, and not believing;<br/> And in the last is greater sin and shame.<br/></p>
				<p>Below you do not journey by one path<br/> Philosophising; so transporteth you<br/> Love of appearance and the thought thereof.<br/></p>
				<p>And even this above here is endured<br/> With less disdain, than when is set aside<br/> The Holy Writ, or when it is distorted.<br/></p>
				<p>They think not there how much of blood it costs<br/> To sow it in the world, and how he pleases<br/> Who in humility keeps close to it.<br/></p>
				<p>Each striveth for appearance, and doth make<br/> His own inventions; and these treated are<br/> By preachers, and the Evangel holds its peace.<br/></p>
				<p>One sayeth that the moon did backward turn,<br/> In the Passion of Christ, and interpose herself<br/> So that the sunlight reached not down below;<br/></p>
				<p>And lies; for of its own accord the light<br/> Hid itself; whence to Spaniards and to Indians,<br/> As to the Jews, did such eclipse respond.<br/></p>
				<p>Florence has not so many Lapi and Bindi<br/> As fables such as these, that every year<br/> Are shouted from the pulpit back and forth,<br/></p>
				<p>In such wise that the lambs, who do not know,<br/> Come back from pasture fed upon the wind,<br/> And not to see the harm doth not excuse them.<br/></p>
				<p>Christ did not to his first disciples say,<br/> ‘Go forth, and to the world preach idle tales,’<br/> But unto them a true foundation gave;<br/></p>
				<p>And this so loudly sounded from their lips,<br/> That, in the warfare to enkindle Faith,<br/> They made of the Evangel shields and lances.<br/></p>
				<p>Now men go forth with jests and drolleries<br/> To preach, and if but well the people laugh,<br/> The hood puffs out, and nothing more is asked.<br/></p>
				<p>But in the cowl there nestles such a bird,<br/> That, if the common people were to see it,<br/> They would perceive what pardons they confide in,<br/></p>
				<p>For which so great on earth has grown the folly,<br/> That, without proof of any testimony,<br/> To each indulgence they would flock together.<br/></p>
				<p>By this Saint Anthony his pig doth fatten,<br/> And many others, who are worse than pigs,<br/> Paying in money without mark of coinage.<br/></p>
				<p>But since we have digressed abundantly,<br/> Turn back thine eyes forthwith to the right path,<br/> So that the way be shortened with the time.<br/></p>
				<p>This nature doth so multiply itself<br/> In numbers, that there never yet was speech<br/> Nor mortal fancy that can go so far.<br/></p>
				<p>And if thou notest that which is revealed<br/> By Daniel, thou wilt see that in his thousands<br/> Number determinate is kept concealed.<br/></p>
				<p>The primal light, that all irradiates it,<br/> By modes as many is received therein,<br/> As are the splendours wherewith it is mated.<br/></p>
				<p>Hence, inasmuch as on the act conceptive<br/> The affection followeth, of love the sweetness<br/> Therein diversely fervid is or tepid.<br/></p>
				<p>The height behold now and the amplitude<br/> Of the eternal power, since it hath made<br/> Itself so many mirrors, where ’tis broken,<br/></p>
				<p>One in itself remaining as before.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-30" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Tenth Heaven, or Empyrean.⁠—The River of Light.⁠—The Two Courts of Heaven.⁠—The White Rose of Paradise</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Perchance six thousand miles remote from us<br/> Is glowing the sixth hour, and now this world<br/> Inclines its shadow almost to a level,<br/></p>
				<p>When the mid-heaven begins to make itself<br/> So deep to us, that here and there a star<br/> Ceases to shine so far down as this depth,<br/></p>
				<p>And as advances bright exceedingly<br/> The handmaid of the sun, the heaven is closed<br/> Light after light to the most beautiful;<br/></p>
				<p>Not otherwise the Triumph, which for ever<br/> Plays round about the point that vanquished me,<br/> Seeming enclosed by what itself encloses,<br/></p>
				<p>Little by little from my vision faded;<br/> Whereat to turn mine eyes on Beatrice<br/> My seeing nothing and my love constrained me.<br/></p>
				<p>If what has hitherto been said of her<br/> Were all concluded in a single praise,<br/> Scant would it be to serve the present turn.<br/></p>
				<p>Not only does the beauty I beheld<br/> Transcend ourselves, but truly I believe<br/> Its Maker only may enjoy it all.<br/></p>
				<p>Vanquished do I confess me by this passage<br/> More than by problem of his theme was ever<br/> O’ercome the comic or the tragic poet;<br/></p>
				<p>For as the sun the sight that trembles most,<br/> Even so the memory of that sweet smile<br/> My mind depriveth of its very self.<br/></p>
				<p>From the first day that I beheld her face<br/> In this life, to the moment of this look,<br/> The sequence of my song has ne’er been severed;<br/></p>
				<p>But now perforce this sequence must desist<br/> From following her beauty with my verse,<br/> As every artist at his uttermost.<br/></p>
				<p>Such as I leave her to a greater fame<br/> Than any of my trumpet, which is bringing<br/> Its arduous matter to a final close,<br/></p>
				<p>With voice and gesture of a perfect leader<br/> She recommenced: “We from the greatest body<br/> Have issued to the heaven that is pure light;<br/></p>
				<p>Light intellectual replete with love,<br/> Love of true good replete with ecstasy,<br/> Ecstasy that transcendeth every sweetness.<br/></p>
				<p>Here shalt thou see the one host and the other<br/> Of Paradise, and one in the same aspects<br/> Which at the final judgment thou shalt see.”<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a sudden lightning that disperses<br/> The visual spirits, so that it deprives<br/> The eye of impress from the strongest objects,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus round about me flashed a living light,<br/> And left me swathed around with such a veil<br/> Of its effulgence, that I nothing saw.<br/></p>
				<p>“Ever the Love which quieteth this heaven<br/> Welcomes into itself with such salute,<br/> To make the candle ready for its flame.”<br/></p>
				<p>No sooner had within me these brief words<br/> An entrance found, than I perceived myself<br/> To be uplifted over my own power,<br/></p>
				<p>And I with vision new rekindled me,<br/> Such that no light whatever is so pure<br/> But that mine eyes were fortified against it.<br/></p>
				<p>And light I saw in fashion of a river<br/> Fulvid with its effulgence, ’twixt two banks<br/> Depicted with an admirable Spring.<br/></p>
				<p>Out of this river issued living sparks,<br/> And on all sides sank down into the flowers,<br/> Like unto rubies that are set in gold;<br/></p>
				<p>And then, as if inebriate with the odours,<br/> They plunged again into the wondrous torrent,<br/> And as one entered issued forth another.<br/></p>
				<p>“The high desire, that now inflames and moves thee<br/> To have intelligence of what thou seest,<br/> Pleaseth me all the more, the more it swells.<br/></p>
				<p>But of this water it behoves thee drink<br/> Before so great a thirst in thee be slaked.”<br/> Thus said to me the sunshine of mine eyes;<br/></p>
				<p>And added: “The river and the topazes<br/> Going in and out, and the laughing of the herbage,<br/> Are of their truth foreshadowing prefaces;<br/></p>
				<p>Not that these things are difficult in themselves,<br/> But the deficiency is on thy side,<br/> For yet thou hast not vision so exalted.”<br/></p>
				<p>There is no babe that leaps so suddenly<br/> With face towards the milk, if he awake<br/> Much later than his usual custom is,<br/></p>
				<p>As I did, that I might make better mirrors<br/> Still of mine eyes, down stooping to the wave<br/> Which flows that we therein be better made.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as the penthouse of mine eyelids<br/> Drank of it, it forthwith appeared to me<br/> Out of its length to be transformed to round.<br/></p>
				<p>Then as a folk who have been under masks<br/> Seem other than before, if they divest<br/> The semblance not their own they disappeared in,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus into greater pomp were changed for me<br/> The flowerets and the sparks, so that I saw<br/> Both of the Courts of Heaven made manifest.<br/></p>
				<p>O splendour of God! by means of which I saw<br/> The lofty triumph of the realm veracious,<br/> Give me the power to say how it I saw!<br/></p>
				<p>There is a light above, which visible<br/> Makes the Creator unto every creature,<br/> Who only in beholding Him has peace,<br/></p>
				<p>And it expands itself in circular form<br/> To such extent, that its circumference<br/> Would be too large a girdle for the sun.<br/></p>
				<p>The semblance of it is all made of rays<br/> Reflected from the top of Primal Motion,<br/> Which takes therefrom vitality and power.<br/></p>
				<p>And as a hill in water at its base<br/> Mirrors itself, as if to see its beauty<br/> When affluent most in verdure and in flowers,<br/></p>
				<p>So, ranged aloft all round about the light,<br/> Mirrored I saw in more ranks than a thousand<br/> All who above there have from us returned.<br/></p>
				<p>And if the lowest row collect within it<br/> So great a light, how vast the amplitude<br/> Is of this Rose in its extremest leaves!<br/></p>
				<p>My vision in the vastness and the height<br/> Lost not itself, but comprehended all<br/> The quantity and quality of that gladness.<br/></p>
				<p>There near and far nor add nor take away;<br/> For there where God immediately doth govern,<br/> The natural law in naught is relevant.<br/></p>
				<p>Into the yellow of the Rose Eternal<br/> That spreads, and multiplies, and breathes an odour<br/> Of praise unto the ever-vernal Sun,<br/></p>
				<p>As one who silent is and fain would speak,<br/> Me Beatrice drew on, and said: “Behold<br/> Of the white stoles how vast the convent is!<br/></p>
				<p>Behold how vast the circuit of our city!<br/> Behold our seats so filled to overflowing,<br/> That here henceforward are few people wanting!<br/></p>
				<p>On that great throne whereon thine eyes are fixed<br/> For the crown’s sake already placed upon it,<br/> Before thou suppest at this wedding feast<br/></p>
				<p>Shall sit the soul (that is to be Augustus<br/> On earth) of noble Henry, who shall come<br/> To redress Italy ere she be ready.<br/></p>
				<p>Blind covetousness, that casts its spell upon you,<br/> Has made you like unto the little child,<br/> Who dies of hunger and drives off the nurse.<br/></p>
				<p>And in the sacred forum then shall be<br/> A Prefect such, that openly or covert<br/> On the same road he will not walk with him.<br/></p>
				<p>But long of God he will not be endured<br/> In holy office; he shall be thrust down<br/> Where Simon Magus is for his deserts,<br/></p>
				<p>And make him of Alagna lower go!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-31" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Glory of Paradise.⁠—<abbr>St.</abbr> Bernard</span>
				</h3>
				<p>In fashion then as of a snow-white rose<br/> Displayed itself to me the saintly host,<br/> Whom Christ in his own blood had made his bride,<br/></p>
				<p>But the other host, that flying sees and sings<br/> The glory of Him who doth enamour it,<br/> And the goodness that created it so noble,<br/></p>
				<p>Even as a swarm of bees, that sinks in flowers<br/> One moment, and the next returns again<br/> To where its labour is to sweetness turned,<br/></p>
				<p>Sank into the great flower, that is adorned<br/> With leaves so many, and thence reascended<br/> To where its love abideth evermore.<br/></p>
				<p>Their faces had they all of living flame,<br/> And wings of gold, and all the rest so white<br/> No snow unto that limit doth attain.<br/></p>
				<p>From bench to bench, into the flower descending,<br/> They carried something of the peace and ardour<br/> Which by the fanning of their flanks they won.<br/></p>
				<p>Nor did the interposing ’twixt the flower<br/> And what was o’er it of such plenitude<br/> Of flying shapes impede the sight and splendour;<br/></p>
				<p>Because the light divine so penetrates<br/> The universe, according to its merit,<br/> That naught can be an obstacle against it.<br/></p>
				<p>This realm secure and full of gladsomeness,<br/> Crowded with ancient people and with modern,<br/> Unto one mark had all its look and love.<br/></p>
				<p>O Trinal Light, that in a single star<br/> Sparkling upon their sight so satisfies them,<br/> Look down upon our tempest here below!<br/></p>
				<p>If the barbarians, coming from some region<br/> That every day by Helice is covered,<br/> Revolving with her son whom she delights in,<br/></p>
				<p>Beholding Rome and all her noble works,<br/> Were wonder-struck, what time the Lateran<br/> Above all mortal things was eminent⁠—<br/></p>
				<p>I who to the divine had from the human,<br/> From time unto eternity, had come,<br/> From Florence to a people just and sane,<br/></p>
				<p>With what amazement must I have been filled!<br/> Truly between this and the joy, it was<br/> My pleasure not to hear, and to be mute.<br/></p>
				<p>And as a pilgrim who delighteth him<br/> In gazing round the temple of his vow,<br/> And hopes some day to retell how it was,<br/></p>
				<p>So through the living light my way pursuing<br/> Directed I mine eyes o’er all the ranks,<br/> Now up, now down, and now all round about.<br/></p>
				<p>Faces I saw of charity persuasive,<br/> Embellished by His light and their own smile,<br/> And attitudes adorned with every grace.<br/></p>
				<p>The general form of Paradise already<br/> My glance had comprehended as a whole,<br/> In no part hitherto remaining fixed,<br/></p>
				<p>And round I turned me with rekindled wish<br/> My Lady to interrogate of things<br/> Concerning which my mind was in suspense.<br/></p>
				<p>One thing I meant, another answered me;<br/> I thought I should see Beatrice, and saw<br/> An Old Man habited like the glorious people.<br/></p>
				<p>O’erflowing was he in his eyes and cheeks<br/> With joy benign, in attitude of pity<br/> As to a tender father is becoming.<br/></p>
				<p>And “She, where is she?” instantly I said;<br/> Whence he: “To put an end to thy desire,<br/> Me Beatrice hath sent from mine own place.<br/></p>
				<p>And if thou lookest up to the third round<br/> Of the first rank, again shalt thou behold her<br/> Upon the throne her merits have assigned her.”<br/></p>
				<p>Without reply I lifted up mine eyes,<br/> And saw her, as she made herself a crown<br/> Reflecting from herself the eternal rays.<br/></p>
				<p>Not from that region which the highest thunders<br/> Is any mortal eye so far removed,<br/> In whatsoever sea it deepest sinks,<br/></p>
				<p>As there from Beatrice my sight; but this<br/> Was nothing unto me; because her image<br/> Descended not to me by medium blurred.<br/></p>
				<p>“O Lady, thou in whom my hope is strong,<br/> And who for my salvation didst endure<br/> In Hell to leave the imprint of thy feet,<br/></p>
				<p>Of whatsoever things I have beheld,<br/> As coming from thy power and from thy goodness<br/> I recognise the virtue and the grace.<br/></p>
				<p>Thou from a slave hast brought me unto freedom,<br/> By all those ways, by all the expedients,<br/> Whereby thou hadst the power of doing it.<br/></p>
				<p>Preserve towards me thy magnificence,<br/> So that this soul of mine, which thou hast healed,<br/> Pleasing to thee be loosened from the body.”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus I implored; and she, so far away,<br/> Smiled, as it seemed, and looked once more at me;<br/> Then unto the eternal fountain turned.<br/></p>
				<p>And said the Old Man holy: “That thou mayst<br/> Accomplish perfectly thy journeying,<br/> Whereunto prayer and holy love have sent me,<br/></p>
				<p>Fly with thine eyes all round about this garden;<br/> For seeing it will discipline thy sight<br/> Farther to mount along the ray divine.<br/></p>
				<p>And she, the Queen of Heaven, for whom I burn<br/> Wholly with love, will grant us every grace,<br/> Because that I her faithful Bernard am.”<br/></p>
				<p>As he who peradventure from Croatia<br/> Cometh to gaze at our Veronica,<br/> Who through its ancient fame is never sated,<br/></p>
				<p>But says in thought, the while it is displayed,<br/> “My Lord, Christ Jesus, God of very God,<br/> Now was your semblance made like unto this?”<br/></p>
				<p>Even such was I while gazing at the living<br/> Charity of the man, who in this world<br/> By contemplation tasted of that peace.<br/></p>
				<p>“Thou son of grace, this jocund life,” began he,<br/> “Will not be known to thee by keeping ever<br/> Thine eyes below here on the lowest place;<br/></p>
				<p>But mark the circles to the most remote,<br/> Until thou shalt behold enthroned the Queen<br/> To whom this realm is subject and devoted.”<br/></p>
				<p>I lifted up mine eyes, and as at morn<br/> The oriental part of the horizon<br/> Surpasses that wherein the sun goes down,<br/></p>
				<p>Thus, as if going with mine eyes from vale<br/> To mount, I saw a part in the remoteness<br/> Surpass in splendour all the other front.<br/></p>
				<p>And even as there where we await the pole<br/> That Phaeton drove badly, blazes more<br/> The light, and is on either side diminished,<br/></p>
				<p>So likewise that pacific oriflamme<br/> Gleamed brightest in the centre, and each side<br/> In equal measure did the flame abate.<br/></p>
				<p>And at that centre, with their wings expanded,<br/> More than a thousand jubilant Angels saw I,<br/> Each differing in effulgence and in kind.<br/></p>
				<p>I saw there at their sports and at their songs<br/> A beauty smiling, which the gladness was<br/> Within the eyes of all the other saints;<br/></p>
				<p>And if I had in speaking as much wealth<br/> As in imagining, I should not dare<br/> To attempt the smallest part of its delight.<br/></p>
				<p>Bernard, as soon as he beheld mine eyes<br/> Fixed and intent upon its fervid fervour,<br/> His own with such affection turned to her<br/></p>
				<p>That it made mine more ardent to behold.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-32" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle"><abbr>St.</abbr> Bernard points out the Saints in the White Rose</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Absorbed in his delight, that contemplator<br/> Assumed the willing office of a teacher,<br/> And gave beginning to these holy words:<br/></p>
				<p>“The wound that Mary closed up and anointed,<br/> She at her feet who is so beautiful,<br/> She is the one who opened it and pierced it.<br/></p>
				<p>Within that order which the third seats make<br/> Is seated Rachel, lower than the other,<br/> With Beatrice, in manner as thou seest.<br/></p>
				<p>Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and her who was<br/> Ancestress of the Singer, who for dole<br/> Of the misdeed said, ‘Miserere mei,’<br/></p>
				<p>Canst thou behold from seat to seat descending<br/> Down in gradation, as with each one’s name<br/> I through the Rose go down from leaf to leaf.<br/></p>
				<p>And downward from the seventh row, even as<br/> Above the same, succeed the Hebrew women,<br/> Dividing all the tresses of the flower;<br/></p>
				<p>Because, according to the view which Faith<br/> In Christ had taken, these are the partition<br/> By which the sacred stairways are divided.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon this side, where perfect is the flower<br/> With each one of its petals, seated are<br/> Those who believed in Christ who was to come.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon the other side, where intersected<br/> With vacant spaces are the semicircles,<br/> Are those who looked to Christ already come.<br/></p>
				<p>And as, upon this side, the glorious seat<br/> Of the Lady of Heaven, and the other seats<br/> Below it, such a great division make,<br/></p>
				<p>So opposite doth that of the great John,<br/> Who, ever holy, desert and martyrdom<br/> Endured, and afterwards two years in Hell.<br/></p>
				<p>And under him thus to divide were chosen<br/> Francis, and Benedict, and Augustine,<br/> And down to us the rest from round to round.<br/></p>
				<p>Behold now the high providence divine;<br/> For one and other aspect of the Faith<br/> In equal measure shall this garden fill.<br/></p>
				<p>And know that downward from that rank which cleaves<br/> Midway the sequence of the two divisions,<br/> Not by their proper merit are they seated;<br/></p>
				<p>But by another’s under fixed conditions;<br/> For these are spirits one and all assoiled<br/> Before they any true election had.<br/></p>
				<p>Well canst thou recognise it in their faces,<br/> And also in their voices puerile,<br/> If thou regard them well and hearken to them.<br/></p>
				<p>Now doubtest thou, and doubting thou art silent;<br/> But I will loosen for thee the strong bond<br/> In which thy subtile fancies hold thee fast.<br/></p>
				<p>Within the amplitude of this domain<br/> No casual point can possibly find place,<br/> No more than sadness can, or thirst, or hunger;<br/></p>
				<p>For by eternal law has been established<br/> Whatever thou beholdest, so that closely<br/> The ring is fitted to the finger here.<br/></p>
				<p>And therefore are these people, festinate<br/> Unto true life, not ‘sine causa’ here<br/> More and less excellent among themselves.<br/></p>
				<p>The King, by means of whom this realm reposes<br/> In so great love and in so great delight<br/> That no will ventureth to ask for more,<br/></p>
				<p>In his own joyous aspect every mind<br/> Creating, at his pleasure dowers with grace<br/> Diversely; and let here the effect suffice.<br/></p>
				<p>And this is clearly and expressly noted<br/> For you in Holy Scripture, in those twins<br/> Who in their mother had their anger roused.<br/></p>
				<p>According to the colour of the hair,<br/> Therefore, with such a grace the light supreme<br/> Consenteth that they worthily be crowned.<br/></p>
				<p>Without, then, any merit of their deeds,<br/> Stationed are they in different gradations,<br/> Differing only in their first acuteness.<br/></p>
				<p>’Tis true that in the early centuries,<br/> With innocence, to work out their salvation<br/> Sufficient was the faith of parents only.<br/></p>
				<p>After the earlier ages were completed,<br/> Behoved it that the males by circumcision<br/> Unto their innocent wings should virtue add;<br/></p>
				<p>But after that the time of grace had come<br/> Without the baptism absolute of Christ,<br/> Such innocence below there was retained.<br/></p>
				<p>Look now into the face that unto Christ<br/> Hath most resemblance; for its brightness only<br/> Is able to prepare thee to see Christ.”<br/></p>
				<p>On her did I behold so great a gladness<br/> Rain down, borne onward in the holy minds<br/> Created through that altitude to fly,<br/></p>
				<p>That whatsoever I had seen before<br/> Did not suspend me in such admiration,<br/> Nor show me such similitude of God.<br/></p>
				<p>And the same Love that first descended there,<br/> “Ave Maria, gratia plena,” singing,<br/> In front of her his wings expanded wide.<br/></p>
				<p>Unto the canticle divine responded<br/> From every part the court beatified,<br/> So that each sight became serener for it.<br/></p>
				<p>“O holy father, who for me endurest<br/> To be below here, leaving the sweet place<br/> In which thou sittest by eternal lot,<br/></p>
				<p>Who is the Angel that with so much joy<br/> Into the eyes is looking of our Queen,<br/> Enamoured so that he seems made of fire?”<br/></p>
				<p>Thus I again recourse had to the teaching<br/> Of that one who delighted him in Mary<br/> As doth the star of morning in the sun.<br/></p>
				<p>And he to me: “Such gallantry and grace<br/> As there can be in Angel and in soul,<br/> All is in him; and thus we fain would have it;<br/></p>
				<p>Because he is the one who bore the palm<br/> Down unto Mary, when the Son of God<br/> To take our burden on himself decreed.<br/></p>
				<p>But now come onward with thine eyes, as I<br/> Speaking shall go, and note the great patricians<br/> Of this most just and merciful of empires.<br/></p>
				<p>Those two that sit above there most enrapture<br/> As being very near unto Augusta,<br/> Are as it were the two roots of this Rose.<br/></p>
				<p>He who upon the left is near her placed<br/> The father is, by whose audacious taste<br/> The human species so much bitter tastes.<br/></p>
				<p>Upon the right thou seest that ancient father<br/> Of Holy Church, into whose keeping Christ<br/> The keys committed of this lovely flower.<br/></p>
				<p>And he who all the evil days beheld,<br/> Before his death, of her the beauteous bride<br/> Who with the spear and with the nails was won,<br/></p>
				<p>Beside him sits, and by the other rests<br/> That leader under whom on manna lived<br/> The people ingrate, fickle, and stiff-necked.<br/></p>
				<p>Opposite Peter seest thou Anna seated,<br/> So well content to look upon her daughter,<br/> Her eyes she moves not while she sings Hosanna.<br/></p>
				<p>And opposite the eldest household father<br/> Lucia sits, she who thy Lady moved<br/> When to rush downward thou didst bend thy brows.<br/></p>
				<p>But since the moments of thy vision fly,<br/> Here will we make full stop, as a good tailor<br/> Who makes the gown according to his cloth,<br/></p>
				<p>And unto the first Love will turn our eyes,<br/> That looking upon Him thou penetrate<br/> As far as possible through his effulgence.<br/></p>
				<p>Truly, lest peradventure thou recede,<br/> Moving thy wings believing to advance,<br/> By prayer behoves it that grace be obtained;<br/></p>
				<p>Grace from that one who has the power to aid thee;<br/> And thou shalt follow me with thy affection<br/> That from my words thy heart turn not aside.”<br/></p>
				<p>And he began this holy orison.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="paradiso-canto-33" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Prayer to the Virgin.⁠—The Threefold Circle of the Trinity.⁠—Mystery of the Divine and Human Nature</span>
				</h3>
				<p>“Thou Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son,<br/> Humble and high beyond all other creature,<br/> The limit fixed of the eternal counsel,<br/></p>
				<p>Thou art the one who such nobility<br/> To human nature gave, that its Creator<br/> Did not disdain to make himself its creature.<br/></p>
				<p>Within thy womb rekindled was the love,<br/> By heat of which in the eternal peace<br/> After such wise this flower has germinated.<br/></p>
				<p>Here unto us thou art a noonday torch<br/> Of charity, and below there among mortals<br/> Thou art the living fountain-head of hope.<br/></p>
				<p>Lady, thou art so great, and so prevailing,<br/> That he who wishes grace, nor runs to thee,<br/> His aspirations without wings would fly.<br/></p>
				<p>Not only thy benignity gives succour<br/> To him who asketh it, but oftentimes<br/> Forerunneth of its own accord the asking.<br/></p>
				<p>In thee compassion is, in thee is pity,<br/> In thee magnificence; in thee unites<br/> Whate’er of goodness is in any creature.<br/></p>
				<p>Now doth this man, who from the lowest depth<br/> Of the universe as far as here has seen<br/> One after one the spiritual lives,<br/></p>
				<p>Supplicate thee through grace for so much power<br/> That with his eyes he may uplift himself<br/> Higher towards the uttermost salvation.<br/></p>
				<p>And I, who never burned for my own seeing<br/> More than I do for his, all of my prayers<br/> Proffer to thee, and pray they come not short,<br/></p>
				<p>That thou wouldst scatter from him every cloud<br/> Of his mortality so with thy prayers,<br/> That the Chief Pleasure be to him displayed.<br/></p>
				<p>Still farther do I pray thee, Queen, who canst<br/> Whate’er thou wilt, that sound thou mayst preserve<br/> After so great a vision his affections.<br/></p>
				<p>Let thy protection conquer human movements;<br/> See Beatrice and all the blessed ones<br/> My prayers to second clasp their hands to thee!”<br/></p>
				<p>The eyes beloved and revered of God,<br/> Fastened upon the speaker, showed to us<br/> How grateful unto her are prayers devout;<br/></p>
				<p>Then unto the Eternal Light they turned,<br/> On which it is not credible could be<br/> By any creature bent an eye so clear.<br/></p>
				<p>And I, who to the end of all desires<br/> Was now approaching, even as I ought<br/> The ardour of desire within me ended.<br/></p>
				<p>Bernard was beckoning unto me, and smiling,<br/> That I should upward look; but I already<br/> Was of my own accord such as he wished;<br/></p>
				<p>Because my sight, becoming purified,<br/> Was entering more and more into the ray<br/> Of the High Light which of itself is true.<br/></p>
				<p>From that time forward what I saw was greater<br/> Than our discourse, that to such vision yields,<br/> And yields the memory unto such excess.<br/></p>
				<p>Even as he is who seeth in a dream,<br/> And after dreaming the imprinted passion<br/> Remains, and to his mind the rest returns not,<br/></p>
				<p>Even such am I, for almost utterly<br/> Ceases my vision, and distilleth yet<br/> Within my heart the sweetness born of it;<br/></p>
				<p>Even thus the snow is in the sun unsealed,<br/> Even thus upon the wind in the light leaves<br/> Were the soothsayings of the Sibyl lost.<br/></p>
				<p>O Light Supreme, that dost so far uplift thee<br/> From the conceits of mortals, to my mind<br/> Of what thou didst appear re-lend a little,<br/></p>
				<p>And make my tongue of so great puissance,<br/> That but a single sparkle of thy glory<br/> It may bequeath unto the future people;<br/></p>
				<p>For by returning to my memory somewhat,<br/> And by a little sounding in these verses,<br/> More of thy victory shall be conceived!<br/></p>
				<p>I think the keenness of the living ray<br/> Which I endured would have bewildered me,<br/> If but mine eyes had been averted from it;<br/></p>
				<p>And I remember that I was more bold<br/> On this account to bear, so that I joined<br/> My aspect with the Glory Infinite.<br/></p>
				<p>O grace abundant, by which I presumed<br/> To fix my sight upon the Light Eternal,<br/> So that the seeing I consumed therein!<br/></p>
				<p>I saw that in its depth far down is lying<br/> Bound up with love together in one volume,<br/> What through the universe in leaves is scattered;<br/></p>
				<p>Substance, and accident, and their operations,<br/> All interfused together in such wise<br/> That what I speak of is one simple light.<br/></p>
				<p>The universal fashion of this knot<br/> Methinks I saw, since more abundantly<br/> In saying this I feel that I rejoice.<br/></p>
				<p>One moment is more lethargy to me,<br/> Than five and twenty centuries to the emprise<br/> That startled Neptune with the shade of Argo!<br/></p>
				<p>My mind in this wise wholly in suspense,<br/> Steadfast, immovable, attentive gazed,<br/> And evermore with gazing grew enkindled.<br/></p>
				<p>In presence of that light one such becomes,<br/> That to withdraw therefrom for other prospect<br/> It is impossible he e’er consent;<br/></p>
				<p>Because the good, which object is of will,<br/> Is gathered all in this, and out of it<br/> That is defective which is perfect there.<br/></p>
				<p>Shorter henceforward will my language fall<br/> Of what I yet remember, than an infant’s<br/> Who still his tongue doth moisten at the breast.<br/></p>
				<p>Not because more than one unmingled semblance<br/> Was in the living light on which I looked,<br/> For it is always what it was before;<br/></p>
				<p>But through the sight, that fortified itself<br/> In me by looking, one appearance only<br/> To me was ever changing as I changed.<br/></p>
				<p>Within the deep and luminous subsistence<br/> Of the High Light appeared to me three circles,<br/> Of threefold colour and of one dimension,<br/></p>
				<p>And by the second seemed the first reflected<br/> As Iris is by Iris, and the third<br/> Seemed fire that equally from both is breathed.<br/></p>
				<p>O how all speech is feeble and falls short<br/> Of my conceit, and this to what I saw<br/> Is such, ’tis not enough to call it little!<br/></p>
				<p>O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,<br/> Sole knowest thyself, and, known unto thyself<br/> And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!<br/></p>
				<p>That circulation, which being thus conceived<br/> Appeared in thee as a reflected light,<br/> When somewhat contemplated by mine eyes,<br/></p>
				<p>Within itself, of its own very colour<br/> Seemed to me painted with our effigy,<br/> Wherefore my sight was all absorbed therein.<br/></p>
				<p>As the geometrician, who endeavours<br/> To square the circle, and discovers not,<br/> By taking thought, the principle he wants,<br/></p>
				<p>Even such was I at that new apparition;<br/> I wished to see how the image to the circle<br/> Conformed itself, and how it there finds place;<br/></p>
				<p>But my own wings were not enough for this,<br/> Had it not been that then my mind there smote<br/> A flash of lightning, wherein came its wish.<br/></p>
				<p>Here vigour failed the lofty fantasy:<br/> But now was turning my desire and will,<br/> Even as a wheel that equally is moved,<br/></p>
				<p>The Love which moves the sun and the other stars.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
